{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff13\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset204 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset204 Times;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset204 Helvetica;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset204 Helvetica;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset204 Courier;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}
{\f7\fnil\fcharset0 MT Extra;}
{\f8\fnil\fcharset238 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f9\fnil\fcharset238 Times;}
{\f10\fnil\fcharset238 Helvetica;}
{\f11\fnil\fcharset238 Helvetica;}
{\f12\fnil\fcharset238 Courier;}
{\f13\fnil\fcharset0 Times;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\f15\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\f16\fnil\fcharset0 Courier;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\fs20\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40\li0 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s1\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40\li0 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li2048 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32\li512 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li2560 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32\li1024 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li1536 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 part;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was 2010-money.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 1.9.19a on Thu Aug 05 17:42:37 2010
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f13\fs20\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl2680\margr2700\margt2540\margb1760\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f13\aftnnar
{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 A very brief guide to where all the money comes from, and what goes on moneywise] {An Apology for Money}\par

\par\pard\qc {\fs30 \pard\qc\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 [}
\par\pard\qc {\fs24 Karl Svozil}
\par\pard\qc {\fs24 }
\par\pard\qc {\fs24 }
\par\pard\qc {\fs24 }\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s1\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40\li0 Contents\par
}{\field{\*\fldinst TOC \\o "1-3" }{\fldrslt }}
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 1\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Preface\par
\par\par}{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f16\\begin\{chapterquote\} ... \\end\{chapterquote\}}]\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 After ridding themselves from a nuclear power plant just after its completion, some concerned Austrians used to joke, \ldblquote where does all the electricity come from?  Well, of course it comes from the socket! \rdblquote  So, by analogy, one could ask, \ldblquote Where does all our money come from? \rdblquote  and rightly respond, \ldblquote from the teller machine,\rdblquote  or more generally, \ldblquote from the bank! \rdblquote  Wheres in the electrical case the answer appears polemic and foolish, in the money case it is exactly correct: money is \ldblquote produced\rdblquote  by the bank; \ldblquote out of thin air,\rdblquote  or, stated differently, \ldblquote out of nothing.\rdblquote \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Why, then, do we have so little money if it can be created so easily?  Because the essence of money is its scarcity, or at least the impression of scarcity.{\xe{\v scarcity}} For if money was abundand and readily available everywhere, or if anybody could have access to it effortlessly \ldblquote on demand,\rdblquote  it would get inflated and be worth nothing. This, in a sentence, refutes monetary systems without interest or privilege.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 So money appears to be both producible \ldblquote our of thin air,\rdblquote  and at the same time valuable. How to achieve that apparent contradiction is straightforward: first, some \ldblquote authorities\rdblquote  have to be entrusted with the creation of money; and second, some provisions for a appropriation of money should render, at least the impression of, scarcity.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 How did I start to think about money?  About fifteen years ago, my colleage Gerhard Adam was passing me the seemingly simple question of the origin of money as we were having lunch at the cafeteria. He plainly asked me, \ldblquote how exactly is money created? \rdblquote  I still remember that, after some attempts of \ldblquote explaining\rdblquote  this to Gerhard and myself, I ended up staring at my half-eaten salad in bewilderment.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 I almost gasped. I could not tell. I was at a miserable loss when it came to money creation. I felt humiliated and perplexed.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Now, fifteen years later, and after many books, discussions and thoughts on the subject, I am convinced that I can answer that question, at least \ldblquote for all practical purposes\rdblquote  (abbreviated by {\i fapp} by physicists). Yet I had to absorb some uncomforting facts.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Indeed, at some point I felt like the main character in Carpenter\rquote s 1988 movie {\i They Live,} who, after about 30 minutes into that movie, puts on some supposedly normal pair of sunglasses, only to discover that \ldblquote reality\rdblquote  and the \ldblquote surrounding environment,\rdblquote  at least as seen through these glasses, appears to be totally different from what he was conditioned to believe: Imprinted everywhere are manipulative messages, and an alien race is intermingling with the locals.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 I am about to suggest that we have been deceived into believing that money is a relatively benign, passive and unsuspicious entity and medium of exchange\~{Samuelson and Nordhaus} (2004); {Begg {\i et\~al.}} (2005); {Kyrer and Penker} (2000), whereas effectively monetary schemes \emdash  whether they are based on fiat money with no intrinsic value, or on commodities such as silver or gold \emdash  present a systematic method to extract and reappropriate the wealth of nations towards institutions and goals which most of the time would not have found public support by the \ldblquote common man,\rdblquote  the \ldblquote middle class,\rdblquote  and by \ldblquote capitalists\rdblquote  alike.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The gist of my argument, in a nutshell, is a pretty unspectacular claim: that {\i all sorts of money} tend to get corrupted; an effect that in the long run renders money worthless and eventually deprive people holding it. By issuing new money and assuring new generations that this time will be different, the cycle of emergence and corruption starts over again. Under very general assumptions this abusive corruption and misuse of power is inevitable, stringent, and thus should come as no surprise.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The main reason for this pattern of corruption is \ldblquote money multiplication\rdblquote  in various forms. Examples are the degradation of coins by including less precious metals, issuing more and more notes covering less and less commodities (e.g. silver and gold) per note; or in the present \ldblquote fiat\rdblquote  money system \ldblquote covered\rdblquote  merely by our belief in it, by creating money out of \ldblquote thin air.\rdblquote \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The beneficiaries of this Ponzi-type pyramid scheme are {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab the state, which receives money without direct taxation (which always is unpopular, painful and difficult to implement); of course the extra money \ldblquote printed\rdblquote  in exchange of government debt (i.e., bonds) contributes to a general decline in value (inflation), and thus to an {\i indirect taxation;} \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab people holding money or assets if (and only if) they are able to realize {\i cumulative advantages} {\xe{\v cumulative advantage}} (sometimes also referred to {\i compound interest} {\xe{\v compound interest}} or the Matthews Effect\~{Merton} (1968)); {\xe{\v Matthews Effect}} \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab lucky speculants, as well as \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab the \ldblquote Money Trust\rdblquote  \emdash  consisting of all money issuing entities, in particular today\rquote s \ldblquote central banks\rdblquote  as well as the banking and financial industry in general, acquiring \ldblquote something for nothing\rdblquote \~{Soddy} (1934) by collecting {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab valuable assets through monetization, as well as \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab interest through the issue of fiat money in exchange of debt certificates (mostly government bonds). \par
}}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb100 \fi0 States and all forms of governments react decisevely, radically and brutally by extracting wealth from their citicens if necessary. From today\rquote s perspective it appears hardly believable that in the last century totalitarian dictatorships such as Soviet Bolshevism, but also democracies such as Roosevelt\rquote s United States of America (from 1933 to 1975) alike prohibited the possesion of gold by their citizens and penalized infringements with heavy sanctions. In history, sovereigns and states have \ldblquote stolen\rdblquote  the wealth of their subordinates and citizens a zillion of times, and they will do so again and again if they consider it necessary. Thus effectively monetary policy and instruments are just other, \ldblquote implicit and softer\rdblquote  ways to extract valuable assets from their citizens.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 To be able to recognize fully the impact of any monetary system, we must acknowledge historical, psychological, philosophical, and in particular also political issues alike. Thereby, I do not wish to impose any kind of ideological agenda, besides, probably, the opportunistic guiding principle subsumed by the latin phrase {\i \ldblquote cui bono? \rdblquote } meaning \ldblquote to whose benefit? \rdblquote  Furthermore, I suggest to uphold an advice by Sigmund Freud {\xe{\v Freud, Sigmund}} to his successors\~{Freud} (1999), to be aware of the dangers caused by {\scaps0\b0\i \ldblquote {{\u8230\'85}}\~temptations to project, what [[the analyst]] in dull self-perception recognizes as the peculiarities of his own personality, as generally valid theory into science\~{{\u8230\'85}}\~.\rdblquote } Economies are thereby treated as a \ldblquote client-patients,\rdblquote  and whatever findings come up are accepted \ldblquote as is,\rdblquote  without any immediate emphasis or judgment.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Now you might want to wave this off as sounding suspiciosly like a weirdo telling you revisionist conspiracy theories. Actually, I ensure you that I myself tried hard to convice myself that \ldblquote all is well\rdblquote  with our monetary system, besides some wackos claiming to uphold the \ldblquote true truth\rdblquote  while disseminating crappy thoughts about this or that. If you think that is the case, I suggest you rather stop reading and enjoy yourself as long as you can immediately.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 If you want to belive in some {\scaps0\b0\i \ldblquote Sparefroh\rdblquote } {\xe{\v Sparefroh}} mentality I have no intention to trouble you. Let me, as a last word of warning, tell you though, that, as has been pointed out by the Austrian poet {\i Heimito von Doderer}, {\scaps0\b0\i it requires some intelligence to acknowledge one\rquote s own dumbness.} Thus, one should keep in mind that for those not willing to, or being incapable of, providing this intelligence and willingness to cope with certain situations, a lot of mostly unpleasant and unexpected surprises might happen throughout their lifes. But then, they might just as well be lucky. Evading troubling opinions as well as enjoying oneself without too many intellectual concerns regarding things which one might not be able to change anyway, is not totally unreasonable.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 For those Readers still lingering on with this text, I would like to point out that in what follows I have tried to explain my thoughts as short, clear and comprehensible as possible. Being a theoretical physicist myself, I find particularly frustrating any vain tendency to heavily formalize and mathematize macroeconomic processes and issues; endevours which lead to nowhere most of the time. That is, there is not much preditive power in many macroeconomic formisms. Of course, I am not against formalization as such \emdash  just on the contrary!  \emdash  but the reductionist program fails for \ldblquote complicated,\rdblquote  \ldblquote complex\rdblquote  systems which cannot be standardized and reduced to simple behaviors, which can be composed into, or scaled to, macroeconomic scales.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Thus, very little mathematics is presented; instead I suggest to use analytical, critical reasoning and empirical evidence as far as possible. After all, life is too short to spoil it with an unnecessary amount of useles formalism.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The title was chosen because, despite all negative consequences, the author can think of no \ldblquote reasonable\rdblquote  alternative to fiat money, thus in a very general sense he is afraid that, despite its apparent inherent and irreducible lack of stability and the resulting inevitable crises, there is no feasible alternative to it.\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 2\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Money creation by monetization as {\i nothing for something}\par
\par\par}{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f16\\begin\{chapterquote\} ... \\end\{chapterquote\}}]\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {\i Money} appears to be one of the most amazing and mind-boggling entities: we are conditioned to its pervasion, yet we may have merely enigmatic, uncertain ideas of how it is created, how it evolves, and even how it is being accounted. The epistemology of money is confusing and comprises many intertwining layers of narratives; some so trivial they resemble well-told fairy tales of deception\~{Samuelson and Nordhaus} (2004); {Begg {\i et\~al.}} (2005); {Kyrer and Penker} (2000), some so \ldblquote deep\rdblquote  they appear to be rooted in metaphysics\~{Soros} (2003). Can we evade\~{Bouchaud} (2008) the maze or veil created by our conditioning, and erected through (dis)information from the media, contradictory economic theories, ideologies, and influential groups who have a vested interest in one way or another? \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Suppose, for the sake of starting up, an omnipotent agent organizing a society of individuals and institutions allowing ways to co-operate. Obviously, any such configuration should not consist of self-sufficient \ldblquote monads,\rdblquote  but the parties should have scarce entities or {\i assets} to offer to one another; i.e., these assets present some form of {\i value} in the mind of other agents or participants. The recognition, negotiation and exchange of these assets take place in some {\i agora} or {\i market}.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Somewhat arbitrarily disregarding other functions of money as a {\i measure of economic values} and thus of price, a {\i unit of account}, a {\i store of value}, as well as a {\i measure of dept}, money will be introduced as a {\i medium of exchange} and {\i transaction}. The amount of value of an asset expressed in terms or units of money is called {\i price.}\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 There emerge two immediate questions: {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab what is the value of assets, and how are the prices fixed; and \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab how exactly did the negotiating parties obtain their money?  \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb300 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 1  Direct fiat monetization\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Let us consider the second question \emdash  i.e., how the negotiating parties obtain their money \emdash  first. Quite simply, one can obtain money, say, for a bull. That, of course, is only relegating the issue to the customer who offers this money: from where did this customer obtain the money?  Probably by selling some hay bushels to somebody else in exchange of money, and so on and so on. This indirect barter could go on forever without any clue about how the money was introduced into the system in the first place, provided the economy contains enough money to allow unimpeded exchange.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 In a purely commodity based monetary system, barter could be maintained forever. For, in such a system, some commodities, say gold or silver, take on effectively the role of money. Everyone in the possesion of this commodity can acquire anything else, as this commodity is accepted as barter by anybody else.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 This is not the case for fiat money, because this type of medium of exchange, or (legal) tender, has almost no intrinsic commodity value whatsoever. So how exactly does fiat money enter the system in the first place?  The answer is through {\i monetization,} i.e., the process of converting some asset into some form of money that is generally {\i believed} and {\i accepted} as a settlement of an exchange or a debt. Obviously, in order to be \ldblquote generally accepted,\rdblquote  the issuing agency has to be a publicly certified and accepted {\i authority.} Commodity money needs no monetization, as the market value of the commodity could, at least in ideal markets, be related to the market value of the asset exchanged, thus fixing the price in terms of the commodity (money).\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Fiat money presents no intrinsic value, and thus cannot be directly related by its (nonexistent) commodity value. As a substitute of intrinsic value, some (central or noncentral) bank authority issuing the fiat money \ldblquote guarantees\rdblquote  and \ldblquote certifies\rdblquote  its value. Pointedly stated, in an almost \ldblquote magical\rdblquote  manner, some agency (im)prints something on a sheet of paper or digital account, and in that manner \ldblquote creates\rdblquote  money out of \ldblquote thin air.\rdblquote  Henceforth, any such agency will be called {\i bank.} Examples of banks are central banks issuing central bank money (e.g., coins and bills), private (investment) noncentral banks, or funds, creating computerized deposit money accounts containing digits, or IOU\rquote s (abbreviated form of \ldblquote I-Owe-You\rdblquote ) on some substratum, mostly on paper. \ldblquote Trust,\rdblquote  \ldblquote faith\rdblquote  & \ldblquote authority\rdblquote  is required; else everybody would print his own money.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 For the sake of demonstration, suppose you are a cashier. Then you surely would not take a sheet of blank paper where I just wrote \ldblquote \'80100\rdblquote  as down payment for a bottle of wine, returning to me some central bank notes as change; yet you would be willing to value that same sheet of paper if it is \ldblquote backed\rdblquote  by some authority \emdash  such as a credit card company \emdash  you have been conditioned to trust.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Monetization facilitates the chain of exchanges, as banks pass on the money created to somebody possessing assets, thereby acquiring (rights on) these assets. In the view of the asset holder, monetization is the act of \ldblquote turning in\rdblquote  (rights on) assets, thereby obtaining money. From the bank\rquote s perspective, the exchange looks conversely. In this process, the bank acquires both the asset as well as liabilities (balanced by the ownership of the asset). Note that, the bank just \ldblquote produces\rdblquote  money effortlessly \ldblquote out of thin air,\rdblquote  whereas the asset holder had to acquire (e.g. inherit or produce) the asset before selling it to the bank. Surely this puts the banks in a very privileged position: it \ldblquote effortlessly\rdblquote  acquires assets and their associated utilities by \ldblquote producing\rdblquote  money. Another privilege of banks which will be discussed below is the levy of interest on debt.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 After monetization, the bank can utilize the asset, whereas the seller and previous owner of that asset can utilize the money issued by the bank. In one extreme case, the money may remain \ldblquote dormant\rdblquote  in the bank\rquote s account, possibly without even collecting (much) interest; this would be most favorable for the bank. In the other extreme, the seller rushes to convert the bank\rquote s money immediately into nonbank assets, commodities (such as silver, gold, or oil), or central bank money; any such exchange would be least favorable for the bank.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Why should anyone trade in fiat money issued by banks, which is intrinsically worthless, for an asset which has some utility?  Because anyone would exchange fiat money for other valuable assets and utilities.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Examples of monetarization are the bank\rquote s acquisition of {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab government bonds (based on future government income; e.g., claims of taxes), \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab real estate property, \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab commodities, \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab shares in a business or company, \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab future claims of taxes (government bonds), profits or assets, and \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab foreign money; \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab finance derivatives, e.g., over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives; \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab \ldblquote Love Letters\rdblquote \~{Sibert} (2010); {Flannery} (2009); {P{\'e1}ll {\i et\~al.}} (2009); {\xe{\v Love Letters}} i.e., mutual liabilities exchanged by banks (e.g., three subsidiaries of Icelandic banks were posting such notes as collateral at the {\scaps0\b0\i Central Bank of Luxembourg}, receiving {\scaps0\b0\i Eurosystem} loans in exchange, on which they subsequently defaulted\~{{European Central Bank. Eurosystem}} (2009)). \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 {\i Pro forma,} the insertion of money into an economy {\i via} monetization is just another exchange, taking place between the bank and the holder of the asset without any \ldblquote intermediate\rdblquote  money state; the role of the bank\rquote s asset being played by money. As a rule of thumb, banks will monetize everything they seem fit according to some rules laid out by laws and regulatory bodies, and bound by ratings issued by {\i rating agencies} {\xe{\v rating agencies}}.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 2  Which tail wags which dog? \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 In times of crises, if central banks are pressured by politics and their \ldblquote peers,\rdblquote  they may even (in)directly issue money in exchange of government or private debt. It appears ridiculous to pretend that (central) banks can effectively act independently from politics. They do not: in regular times, the interplay between central banks and policy are not so visible, but in particular in times of crises it is not difficult to realize how \ldblquote the tail wags the dog.\rdblquote  Of course, at least in state owned central banks, it is an understatement that the \ldblquote political tail\rdblquote  is the master to begin with. In systems like the Eurosystem, politics goes some ways to ensure that, for instance, at least \ldblquote officially\rdblquote  the heads of the central banks are not directly linked to political parties; but anybody with even a slight interest in these issues could be well aware of the negotiations going on between mayor political and national factions when it comes to persons and strategies, and even tactics. In Austria, this system is called {\i \ldblquote Proporz\rdblquote } {\xe{\v Proporz}} (from {\i appropriation} of power, privileges and resources), as opposed to the US system of {\i lobbyism} {\xe{\v lobbyism}}, and the Soviet system of {\i \ldblquote nomenclatura.\rdblquote }{\xe{\v nomenclatura}}\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Now one could argue that the central bank is just an additional power whose independence should be assured by the principle of {\i the separation of powers} model for the governance of states, along the normal division of branches into an executive, a legislature, and a judiciary. Although breaches of this separation principle are to be expected, they might be rare in not-so-corrupt phases of history, if they exist. It is not totally unreasonable that, although this principle could be uphelt for some time, it will eventually be corrupted by some \ldblquote just cause,\rdblquote  such as war, financing unbalanced butgets by dept, or the fight against economic crises after speculative bubbles collapse, and thus will contribute to money multiplication and thus to a demise of that money.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 It is not totally clear, however, whether one should not consider some central banks as the \ldblquote tail wagging the state.\rdblquote  In particular, if they are privatly owned, such as the {\i Federal Reserve System} {\xe{\v Federal Reserve System}} (with presently unclear ownership\~{{Staff of the U.S. House of Representatives}} (1976)), but this is beyond the sope of this short apology for money.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 3  Limits of fiat monetization\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Could monetization of assets go on forever?  Essentially yes\~{Schneider} (1973); monetization is, at least in principle, only bound by three constraints: {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 {(i)}\tab by the asset value, as assessed by rating agencies; \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 {(ii)}\tab by the reserve assets an economy is capable to render; and \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 {(iii)}\tab as the seller may request to be paid in money or commodities a bank is incapable to produce (such as gold, silver or energy) by the reserve of types of money or commodities, e.g., by central bank money (in case of noncentral banks) or foreign exchange (in case of central banks). \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 In particular, in {\i fractional reserve systems}\~{Nichols} (1992), the money creation by noncentral banks should, at least by this principle, be bound by the inverse of the required fraction of central bank reserves\~{Kyrer and Penker} (2000). How much and what kind of asset qualifies as adequate {\i collateral} and {\i eligible asset} for reserves is a matter of convention (see, for instance Ref.\~{{European Central Bank. Eurosystem}} (2008) for the {\i Eurosystem}, and Ref.\~{{Federal Reserve}} (2009) for the {\i Federal Reserve} system).\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 It is an understatement that, in order to get rid of external limits, a bank will particularly try to evade the reserve requirements (iii) by various methods and techniques. (The \ldblquote explosion\rdblquote  of M3 in terms of M0 and M1 (cf. below) is a very clear indicator thereof.) In doing so, at least in principle, any individual bank could acquire the available marketed assets by newly created money even beyond the \ldblquote utility threshold\rdblquote  \emdash  which is bound by the interest rates \emdash  for private investors. Of course, acquisition may not be a bank\rquote s primary role or concern \emdash  which is often said to be credit creation \emdash  since after acquisition the bank would have to properly utilize the asset; a task which it may find notoriously incapable of performing.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Ideally, the money volume is \ldblquote counterbalanced\rdblquote  by marketable assets (and future entities; see below), so that there neither is a \ldblquote lack\rdblquote  nor an \ldblquote excess\rdblquote  of money, resulting in deflation and recession, or in inflation, respectively. I leave it to the Reader to imagine how hopeless such an endeavor of the creation and maintenance of a \ldblquote balanced fiat monetary equilibrium\rdblquote  in economies with dynamical creation and annihilation of assets, products, expectations, and value must appear. Indeed, the public belief in such an effective equilibrium is a necessary and inevitable delusion for the acceptance any kind of fiat money. As long as this delusion can be maintained for or imposed upon the majority of market participants, fiat money is relatively stable; regardless of the disproportion between volume fiat money and marketable assets (inclusive future entities).\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Note that monetization of assets depends greatly on fixing its \ldblquote intuitive\rdblquote  market value in terms of a formal {\i price} (in currency units). As assets are often not directly marketed or traded, the fixation of asset prices is consigned to {\i rating agencies}. {\xe{\v rating agency}} If the rating agencies are co-owned by the very banks monetizing the asset, or if they are paid by either (buyer\rquote s or seller\rquote s) side of the transaction, a {\i conflict of interest} {\xe{\v conflict of interest}} may occur\~{Smith and Walter} (2009): e.g., by overrating assets systematically, a bank my effectively be able to generate its own almost unlimited supply of money.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Note also that the ratio of money created by the central bank versus other banks can be estimated by ratios of currency {\i components,} serving as empirical measures of aggregates of money stock. Bank money is often denoted by M1,M2,M3; as compared to the amount M0 of currency, i.e., coins and notes, in circulation. This ratio amounts to a few percent (M3 is no longer published for the U.S. Dollar), so \ldblquote most of the money\rdblquote  is not in currency stock. Through the {\i fractional reserve banking system} utilizing the {\i reverse multiplier}\~{Nichols} (1992), and through other \ldblquote less benign & accountable\rdblquote  practices of money creation, \emdash  e.g., by bundling and re-selling debt as investments which have a (triple-A or lower) rating from rating agencies indirectly belonging to the issuers \emdash  most of this noncurrency money is created by noncentral banks.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 4  Fiat fantasies versus \ldblquote deficit spending\rdblquote \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 In more recent times (around 2000 aD) the money created {\scaps0\b0\i via} monetization of \ldblquote products\rdblquote  of the \ldblquote financial sector\rdblquote , such as speculative derivatives of any kind, has {\i by far outnumbered} the money created by governments (bonds) in their attempt of \ldblquote deficit spending\rdblquote  as a means to maintain low unemployment rates, social stability, and military spending. Therefore, it appears almost absurd when investment bankers (and some associated \ldblquote conservative\rdblquote  economists), blame governments of \ldblquote Keynsianism,\rdblquote  while simultaneously engaging in excessive fiat money creation several magnitudes higher than any of these additional government bonds. Furthermore, in times of crises they attempt to consolidate their assets by seducing or blackmailing governments into securing them through future taxation; thereby effectively \ldblquote taking hostage\rdblquote  entire populations, as well as the future generations, of these states by getting them into debt. Indeed, besides all ideologic \ldblquote blabla\rdblquote  talk directed toward the uninformed public, all kinds of money multiplications \emdash  both from government sources as well as from the financial sectors \emdash  contribute to an inflation of the monetary base and to its effective demise.\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 3\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Indirect fiat monetization by expectations\par
\par\par}{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f16\\begin\{chapterquote\} ... \\end\{chapterquote\}}]\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Some nonbank agents, such as explorers, invaders, investors or inventors might require money for future profits. Examples of such nonbank agents are homeowners expecting future salaries, industries expecting the production of future assets, speculators expecting a development of future markets favorable for them, or states waging war on other states in the expectation of victory, allowing the unsolicited exploitation of the opponent\rquote s wealth.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Monetization treats the expectation of future profits quite similarly as assets: a bank can monetize the expectation of future profits by acquiring the right to collecting paybacks from the investor in the future. In order to make sense for the investor, these repayments should at least be counterbalanced by the expected profits. There is a difference between a directly obtained asset and a future asset: whereas the {\i ownership rights} of assets are immediately transferred to banks in the first, direct monetization case, the banks obtain no immediate control over future assets. In more concrete terms: whereas, for example, at direct monetization, the bank can re-sell a monetized real estate property immediately after acquisition, it could only re-sell the rights of future assets in the indirect case. As future profits are necessarily uncertain and subject to possible failures, they are always at risk.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 For a variety of reasons \emdash  e.g., in order to counterbalance their risk and the resulting unwillingness to donate money for uncertain future profits, or to compensate for the temporal delay in consumption\~{B{\'f6}hm-Bawerk} (1884) or foregone profits, and as a reflection of the market price of \ldblquote generic\rdblquote  future profit expectations \emdash  banks levy interest. Debt, i.e., the obligation to repay in the future, is always associated with interest\~{Pesek and Saving} (1968). Interest is the right to (regularly) collect money from the debtor, in addition to the principal \emdash  or to increase the principal as the time of lending increases \emdash  at a certain rate.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Note that, without \ldblquote fiat\rdblquote  credit and dept, the amount of money could only be sustained proportional to the growth (or decline) of marketed assets, as at any given moment it would only be possible to invest money which has already been created, and not also money created {\scaps0\b0\i in expectation} of future profits. By lack of liquidity, this bound seriously cripples an economy as compared to economies allowing \ldblquote fiat\rdblquote  credit. It also assumes that, through monetization and its inverse, a \ldblquote reasonable\rdblquote  equilibrium or balance between the money stock and marketed assets can be maintained, thereby synchronously accounting for all created and annihilated or \ldblquote stored\rdblquote  assets; an assumption which is highly questionable.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Alas, if the \ldblquote fiat\rdblquote  credit and thus also the debt has no direct backing by commodities or monetized assets, the money creation is principally unbounded, resulting in monetary crises if the future profits are overestimated. Yet, despite these unfavorable side effects, the creation of money through the monetization of future profits has been one of the driving forces for the increase of production of assets\~{Soros} (2003); {Binswanger} (2006). Anybody arguing against monetization of future profits and \ldblquote fiat\rdblquote  credit might just as well propose going back to some kind of unrealistic \ldblquote monetary stone age.\rdblquote \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 1  Interest as tax and appropriation\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 As a result the banking sector receives a certain amount of \ldblquote additional\rdblquote  income on an annual base in terms of the interest paid. Where exactly does this money required to pay the interest, in addition to the principal granted, come from?  It cannot come from any other source than the fiat money created by the banks themselves. As the overall amount of valuable assets competing for money (and {\scaps0\b0\i vice versa}) is limited, the effect is a sort of general \ldblquote taxation\rdblquote  by interest\~{Champ and Freeman} (2004), a re-appropriation of assets toward the banks. Even under ideal conditions, this amounts to a geometric progression of the volume of money, the assets created, as well as a redistribution of wealth in favor of the financial sector.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 2  Consequences of no or low interest\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 In view of the possible imbalances from the accumulation of wealth by the financial sector, attempts have been made, e.g., by Christian\~{{Noonan, jr.}} (1957); {Wei{\'df}} (2005) {\scaps0\b0\i (\ldblquote usury\rdblquote )} {\xe{\v usury}} and Islamic\~{Hanke} (2005) {\scaps0\b0\i (\ldblquote riba\rdblquote )} {\xe{\v riba}} communities, to abandon interest altogether. Despite the limits of sustainable growth (in terms of the monetary basis), which might seriosly cripple an economy, the abandonment of interest causes two undesirable alternatives: {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab either the amount of interest has to be limited \ldblquote from the outside\rdblquote  by \ldblquote certain criteria\rdblquote  which effectively introduce privileges: if there is a limited supply of credit, who should receive it?  \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab if there is no limit to the amount of credit available, any agent in the market would find it possible, at least in the extreme case, to \ldblquote buy up all available assets,\rdblquote  because of the zero cost of borrowing, without penalty. But then, if there are more than one agents competing in the market, prices will go up {\scaps0\b0\i ad infinitum;} effectively causing hyperinflation. \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 For example, the high demand for real estate properties reflects the particular importance and the relevance of housing to individuals and families. From the point of view of the buyer, the price of a property appears to be limited by the portion of the household income available for the payment of dept accepted for acquiring that property; i.e., the product of interest rate times the property price should not exceed the buyer\rquote s available income, and thus the price of the property is bound by the income divided by the interest rate. As a result, property prices tend to increase on decreasing interest rates, as potential buyers can afford to bid higher prices. The leverage or ratio of this price increase is determined by the inverse interest rate. In the (absurd) limit, with \ldblquote free credit\rdblquote  associated with zero interest rate, a single buyer would be able to bid an unlimited price for any given property. By unrealistically assuming those prices will not go up due to competing money, the buyer could acquire all properties available on the market.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 3  Inflation and price\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 There seems to be a common belief that it is possible to curb the money supply by regulatory measures. Indeed, interest rates of consumer credits and, say, the U.S. {\scaps0\b0\i federal funds rate} appear to be correlated. This is usually explained by money volume constraints on the noncentral banks, effectively established {\i via} some regulatory mechanisms: in order to prevent bank runs or an unbounded lending policy, banks usually should not be able to create more money than a certain percentage or \ldblquote fraction\rdblquote  of some \ldblquote securities\rdblquote  or reserves they hold; resulting in a \ldblquote mild\rdblquote  form of reserve multiplication\~{Samuelson and Nordhaus} (2004); {Begg {\i et\~al.}} (2005); {Nichols} (1992). This \ldblquote fractional reserve system,\rdblquote  in view of the recent events connected to the \ldblquote packaging\rdblquote  and \ldblquote reselling\rdblquote  of dept by the financial industry in the U.S. and elsewhere, appears to be a commonly told fairy tale.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 On the contrary, it is in the legitimate interest of banks to avoid any reserve constraints, by any \ldblquote quasi-legal\rdblquote  possibility: In the present competitive and highly liquid financial market environment, it is impossible for financial institutions to avoid stretching the regulatory bonds to the extreme; otherwise they will be \ldblquote out of business\rdblquote  soon, overtaken by the competitors which attract their greedy investors.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The amount of outstanding credit of a financial institution is directly proportional to the interest it levies, and consequently to its income. There is, for instance, no immediate reason why a bank should not create money and lend it out for a lower interest rate than the central bank, provided it is not \ldblquote too much\rdblquote  bound by minimal \ldblquote fractional reserves\rdblquote \~{Nichols} (1992): even if the interest rate is arbitrary low, as long as it is positive, there is some obtainable gain. Likewise, no customer needs to fail because of defaulting credit: in the extreme case it would even be conceivable to levy no interest at all until such time when the customer can serve the interest again. Indeed, the customer may be released from debt totally and permanently; this, however, should be done \ldblquote secretly,\rdblquote  because otherwise all debtors would attempt to default as well. Such gifts, of course, can only be granted because the cost of money creation for banks is negligible.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 4  Is interest sustainable? \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 The fast (actually, exponentially) growing {\i compound interest} {\xe{\v compound interest}} suggests that, because of the \ldblquote exploding\rdblquote  money volume, money creation by debt and successive debt restructuring appears to be unsustainable and malign. Are there benign scenarios involving (compound) interest? \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 One way to avoid this vicious circle is sustainable growth: the investment made possible by debt at least \ldblquote pays off\rdblquote  the principal {\i as well as} the (compound) interest at later times. In this case, the newly created assets and services can be monetized, and (part of) the money created through direct monetization is then used to pay back the principal debt and the (compound) interest. Ideally, in this scenario, debt and the associated interest can create growth and wealth\~{Binswanger} (2006).\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 If, however, the investment does not yield enough to pay back the principal and the (compound) interest, then the money created throught debt will contribute to a Ponzi-type unsustainable pyramid game, resulting in more and more debt.\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 4\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Value and price\par
\par\par}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 {\i Price} is the amount of value in terms of money; fixed in a market or {\i agora,} ideally {\scaps0\b0\i via} supply and demand. That is, money is the unit of price and indirectly also of value.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 In a less declamatory but more practical manner, value and prices are derived from fantasies people have about a scarce asset. Suppose I would possess a horse, and I would develop fantasies about romantic rides in the woods; I might get so excited about this emotionally that my break-even point for selling this horse to somebody else (with similar fantasies) settles at a multitude of the price at which I bought the horse myself. The exchange will go through if I can communicate, establish and realize that kind of fantasy at some market, especially also if utilities change.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Recall, for example, past price rises of some inner city property, or of some sections close to the sea shore or to a lake. These sections have been valued very poorly by the original farmers possessing them; for their utilization of land was not in terms of beauty and recreation, but in terms of harvest.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 As there are various markets with very different fantasies and utilities \emdash  some of them rather isolated from each other \emdash  many fantasies co-exist at any given time in a single economy. The common element of the economy is the money available or created. Since it is dependent on various asset values and prices, which itself are determined by fantasies, the amount of monetization is a dynamic, volatile quantity. Moreover, the relative appropriation is dynamic: it may, for instance, be possible for one group of assets \emdash  say, for example, stocks or other financial assets \emdash  to \ldblquote overtake\rdblquote  other sectors or economic segments \emdash  say, for example, labor salaries or property prices. Thereby, a dynamic appropriation of money is obtained. A formalization may be envisaged by constructing a linear vector space; every market segment corresponding to a dimension. A state of the economy is then associated with a vector in this multidimensional state. The dynamics might be modeled by (nonlinear) maps.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 1  Containment and \ldblquote osmosis\rdblquote  of money types\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 If the markets are relatively isolated, these (re)appropriations may not be perceivable for some time: for instance, a financial {\i Wall Street} tycoon will not influence the prices of sausages sold on {\i Wall Street} too much, as he might not be interested in buying a sausage there; and even if he regularly buys sausages for their good taste, he has only use of a very limited number of them. Indeed, the stronger stratified a society, the less will fantasies in one sector will \ldblquote leak through\rdblquote  and affect prices in other sectors. Nevertheless, in the long run, the different market segments or sectors tend to connect through the monetary base. Thus eventually the fantasies exerted in one of them will \ldblquote diffuse\rdblquote  into other sectors almost like \ldblquote osmosis\rdblquote  through small interconnections\~{Friedman} (2008). If, for instance, the same {\i Wall Street} tycoon attempts to \ldblquote take over\rdblquote  most sausage stands of {\i Manhatten,} the very high price he may have to pay for them may indirectly (through the rate of return on investment) affect the street price for sausages there. In reaction, as inflation (in terms of sausage price) goes up, labor costs will increase, contributing to a spiral of inflation.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Effectively, this systems of \ldblquote types\rdblquote  of money \emdash  starting from \ldblquote precious commodities\rdblquote  such as gold, silver, oil, and continuing with the various money components with increasing \ldblquote virtuality\rdblquote  \emdash  resembles the multitude of \ldblquote rubles\rdblquote  in the late Soviet Union; there the \ldblquote gold ruble\rdblquote  would hypothetically buy 0.987412 gram of gold, yet was never available to the general public. Also today, monetarily one of the \ldblquote worst\rdblquote  market transactions would be the {\i direct exchange} of the \ldblquote most abstract\rdblquote  form of money, such as, for instance, government bonds or financial (OTC) derivatives, into gold, silver or platinum.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 At the time of writing, once again\~{Reinhart and Rogoff} (2009) the monetary system is inflated (flooded) by monetized fantasies created primarily by the financial institutions, and to a lesser extent by all sorts of government spending, in particular wars\~{Bonner and Wiggin} (2006); {Stiglitz and Bilmes} (2008). In order to back up the huge unsustainable debts, the financial institutions have turned for government and central bank help\~{Duncan} (2005). Governments effectively back derivatives and other monetized fantasies created by the financial institutions by (future) tax revenues; whereas central banks everywhere seem to monetize government or even private debt.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 It is not totally unreasonable to speculate that the magnitude of these transactions can neither be sustained nor contained to the market sectors in which they have been created. Thus the massive amounts of money volumes in M3 will eventually spill over to the consumer sectors, and to M1 as well, thereby causing (hyper)inflation everywhere. Moreover, the capacity to \ldblquote back up\rdblquote  the M3 volume by taxation and inflation will decrease for socio-political reasons, as societies will grow weary of saving financial institutions through acquiring their risks and debt. Some or all \ldblquote ultimate debtors\rdblquote  such as big governments and/or their associated central banks will then be forced to submit to strategies to get rid of debt, mostly by inflation and by defaulting dept, as outlined in the previous Section\~{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMstgrod \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{6.2}}}.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 There may be several ways to survive this monetary \ldblquote meltdown;\rdblquote  some of them rely on gold (not gold options on paper, but on self-storing the precious metal) or other commodities, some on real estate; some people even rely on little bottles of alcohol and strong spirits, for which, as they claim, demand will be high in times of crises. In principle, one could make huge profits by going into debt now, buying commodities and real estate. After the monetary \ldblquote meltdown\rdblquote  and the following consolidation of the currency, presently acquired debt could then be easily repaid in terms of the new money. If that sounds strange, consider buying a real estate property today for its price thirty years ago.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 2  Instability\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Finally, let me point out several reasons why the belief that the equilibrium between supply & demand will in general settle at a single particular price, and the idea that there exist equilibriums in economies in general, is an idealistic illusion: As money and its various forms and derivatives is itself marketed, the price of money becomes recursive, self-referential and reflexive. Trade policies and military deployment might enforce prices. The market participants might suffer from an overload of information, accompanied by a lack of reliable criteria or authorities to evaluate the information, or might be fed with disinformation. The perpetual flow of spontaneous news and opinions via the media may make impossible the formation of a \ldblquote communication equilibrium.\rdblquote  As markets tend to become virtualized, it is not totally unreasonable to suspect that those who control; i.e., possess and pay through ads, the media control the market and public policy. Thus the modern markets are driven by whatever {\i communication} and {\i (dis)information} is fed into them. The intra-market dynamics might not be sufficiently efficient to settle prices; or there may be no convergence toward a {\i single} price, but rather price cycles and other more chaotic regimes. The volume creation and annihilation of money and debt by governments, (central) banks, corporations and individuals might not allow a stabile settlement of prices by creating (expectations of) a chaotic, or alernating, or \ldblquote spiralling\rdblquote  regime\~{Kauffman} (1987).\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 5\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Formal incompleteness of macroeconomics\par
\par\par}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Related to the the impossibility of equilibria is the fact that no complete macroeconomic theory (or \ldblquote maximal trading strategy\rdblquote ) exists. In what follows it is proved by reduction to the halting problem\~{G{\'f6}del} (1931); {{T}uring} (1937); {Davis} (1958); {Smullyan} (1992) that every macroeconomic theory strong enough to contain {\i substitution,} {\i self-reference} and (Peano) arithmetic is {\i incomplete} in the sense there exist provable {\i true} sentences which are {\i not derivable} and thus {\i independent} of that macroeconomic theory.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The scheme of the proof by contradiction is as follows: the existence of a hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy) capable of solving the problem of whether or not a certain \ldblquote halting\rdblquote  state in a macroeconomy (e.g., a certain price) will occur, is {\i assumed.} This could, for instance, be a \ldblquote winning tactics\rdblquote  of some suspicious \ldblquote super-trading strategy\rdblquote  which takes the code of an arbitrary macroeconomic theory as input and outputs \ldblquote yes\rdblquote  or \ldblquote no,\rdblquote  depending on whether or not the macroeconomic theory predicts a particular \ldblquote halting\rdblquote  state. One may also think of it as a sort of \ldblquote oracle\rdblquote  or \ldblquote black box\rdblquote  taking in an arbitrary trading strategy in terms of its symbolic code, and outputting one of two symbolic states, say \ldblquote yes\rdblquote  or \ldblquote no,\rdblquote  referring to reaching or not reaching its desired goal, respectively.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Based on this {\i \ldblquote hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy)\rdblquote } we construct another {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } as follows: upon receiving some arbitrary {\i \ldblquote macroeconomic theory (trading strategy)\rdblquote } code as input, the {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } consults the {\i \ldblquote hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy)\rdblquote } whether or not this {\i \ldblquote macroeconomic theory (trading strategy)\rdblquote } reaches a macroeconomic \ldblquote halting\rdblquote  state (e.g., a certain price); and upon receiving some answer it just does the {\i opposite:} if the {\i \ldblquote hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy)\rdblquote } decides that the {\i \ldblquote macroeconomic theory (trading strategy)\rdblquote } {\i reaches a particular macroeconomic state (e.g., price),} the {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } {\i counteracts} that prediction (it may do so easily by some kind of market intervention, such as volume leveraged buying or selling). Alternatively, if the {\i \ldblquote hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy)\rdblquote } decides that the {\i \ldblquote macroeconomic theory (trading strategy)\rdblquote } does {\i not reach a macroeconomic \ldblquote halting\rdblquote  state in a (e.g., a certain price),} the {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } {\i steers the economy into that state}.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } can be forced to execute a paradoxical task by receiving {\i its own program code} as {\i \ldblquote macroeconomic theory (trading strategy).\rdblquote } Because by considering the {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy,\rdblquote } the {\i \ldblquote hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy)\rdblquote } steers the {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } into {\i a macroeconomic \ldblquote halting\rdblquote  state (e.g., a certain price)} if it discovers that it {\i does not halt;} conversely, the {\i \ldblquote hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy)\rdblquote } steers the {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } into {\i a state different from the \ldblquote halting\rdblquote  state} if it discovers that it {\i reaches a \ldblquote halting\rdblquote  state.}\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The contradiction obtained in applying the {\i \ldblquote diagonalization (trading) strategy\rdblquote } to its own code proves that this program, and in particular the {\i \ldblquote hypothetical macroeconomic prediction model (trading strategy),\rdblquote } cannot exist.\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 6\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Fiat money games\par
\par\par}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Fiat money is unbounded by any supply constraints (it can be produced almost cost-free). Thus, as long as the market participants can be manipulated to believe in and trust the authorities issuing fiat money \emdash  and what other choice do they have most of the time, when the possession of gold is prohibited and silver is demonetized?  \emdash  its volume can be expanded and contracted at will of those in control, at least as long as command over the money volume is possible. It is not too unreasonable to speculate that these \ldblquote powers to be\rdblquote  need not always and necessarily act in a benign intention to serve the public good, but rather in their own interest. Alas, even if uniform benignancy is assumed, what is good for one group of interests may not serve the interest of other groups; so there always will be ambivalent tradeoffs and dynamical reappropriations. In what follows a few schemes are noted which could be used for the reapproriation of the wealth of nations and within the global economy.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 One may argue that commodity based money did not prevent business cycles either, and that overheating an economy by unsustainable credit creation is not limited to fiat currencies only. However, it may be argued that fiat currencies are more vulnerable to economic crises, and bubbles are both greater and longer; and a subsequent correction tends to be \ldblquote more painful\rdblquote  than in the commodity based case.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 1  Business cycles of inflation and deflation\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 By alternating periods of low and high interest rates it is possible to extract assets from an economy: (i) \ldblquote inflationary periods\rdblquote  are characterized by low interest rates, which encourage \ldblquote bubble buildups\rdblquote  through investments with very low yield at \ldblquote high\rdblquote  (with respect to subsequent periods of high interest) prices, as credit money is \ldblquote cheap.\rdblquote  (ii) subsequent \ldblquote deflationary periods\rdblquote  can be initiated by rising interest rates, which cause corrections (lowering) in prices, credit defaults, and a burst of the investment bubble created in the previous inflationary period.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 By subjecting a market to successive periods of inflation and deflation, it is possible to acquire great wealth by inside knowledge: an inside investor would be prudent to invest into assets (e.g., stocks, derivatives and real estate) shortly before or at the initiation of inflationary periods, \ldblquote riding high on the wave of increasing profits and prices,\rdblquote  and, shortly before a deflationary period sets in, \ldblquote pulling out\rdblquote  of these investments, thereby converting them into \ldblquote save havens\rdblquote  like commodities (e.g., gold and silver); remaining in these \ldblquote conservative positions\rdblquote  until just before a new inflationary period begins. In that way, by controlling the business cycle through money supply, more and more economic assets can be acquired almost risk-free.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 This economic cycle strategy almost appears as if it represented a {\i perpetuum mobile;} but it is not, as it can only succeed if the investor is capable of controlling the money supply. Alas, central banks, and the fractional reserve banking system through multiplication by fractional-reserve banking as a whole, have been institutionalized and should be capable of doing just that \emdash  controlling the money supply \emdash  at least if they are independent and not constraint by politics and external monetary constraints.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 One could speculate that a \ldblquote proper price for investment money\rdblquote  (i.e., interest for credit) might be definable by the {\i absence} of business cylces of the type described above. Whether or not such an \ldblquote ideal\rdblquote  interest rate exists remains highly questionable, as value and price appear highly subjective entities in particular also if they are determined by future expectations. Monopolistic central banks, and the fractional reserve banking system as a whole, merely represent a particular way of handling these issues.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 {\*\bkmkstart BMstgrod}2{\*\bkmkend BMstgrod}  Strategies to get rid of debt\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 In what follows, three modes of getting rid of debt are mentioned: (i) monetization of debt accompanied by (hyper)inflation, (ii) cutbacks in spending, and (iii) bankruptcy, the latter two being accompanied by recession. Unfortunately, these seem to be the long-term options, as there is no \ldblquote free lunch.\rdblquote \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 {\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 2.1  Monetization of debt and (hyper)inflation\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Surely, not everybody can get rid of debt by eliminating his creditor in a style executed by Philipp IV of France against the Knights Templar in 1307. Alternatively, {\i inflation,} and even more so {\i hyperinflation,} is one of the major processes to get rid of debt. The basic idea is quite simple: if debtors are able to keep interest payments at sustainable levels in the first time of the loan, they need not bother about the principal and the interest payments at later times: because, relative to future price and income levels, inflation will \ldblquote melt away\rdblquote  both the principals and interest; i.e., quite literally, debtors could pay back the principal and interest from their \ldblquote pocket money.\rdblquote \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 This, the author believes, is a strategy employed on all scales; at least subconsciously, by small investors acquiring home loans, and up to the government level. In general, the higher the inflation, the faster is the relative reduction of debt, as measured in absolute debt divided by the absolute income; but also the more difficult it is to sustain payments of interest in the first time of the loan.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 {\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 2.2  Cutbacks in spending\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Another possibility to get rid of debt is by allocating resources (such as taxes) to pay off debt. Despite the fact that these measures are politically difficult to impose, they are also bad for business activities, as they reduce the amount of money available in the economy, and thus foster recession.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 {\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 2.3  Bankruptcy and \ldblquote haircuts\rdblquote \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 A third possibility is to \ldblquote write off\rdblquote  debt by bankruptcy or partial remission of a debt, called \ldblquote haircut\rdblquote  nowadays. Here the difficulty lies on the borrower\rquote s side; if borrowers are large banks, this might have negative influences on all kinds of business activities, and may again cause recession.\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 7\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Commodity {\scaps0\b0\i versus} fiat money\par
\par\par}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 With respect to types of money, there appear to be at least two major options: (i) commodity based money and (ii) fiat money.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Despite the obvious difference that a commodity based monetary system is tied much stronger to the almost uncontrollable availability and abundance of commodity \emdash  culminating in the (economically negligible) \ldblquote production\rdblquote  of gold from mercury through transmutation\~{Sherr {\i et\~al.}} (1941) and the undesirable dependence of the amount of exchange money on the aggregate amount of the commodity\~{Wicksell} (1936) \emdash  there exist other drawbacks as well.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 In a commodity based monetary system it is impossible to increase the money supply by the mere expectation of future profits. The resulting lack of liquidity cripples commodity money based economies with respect to others, in particular with respect to economic expansion and military defense. From a financial point of view, the amount of military expansion is dominated by the arbitrary but strict limits on the commodities (mostly silver and gold). Thus eventually any such commodity money based economy will fall prey to an economy based on fiat money. This has happened, for instance, due to the expansionist (monetary and military) policy of {\scaps0\b0\i NAZI} Germany before 1938, who sacked & absorbed the Austrian gold reserves after her occupation.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Thus, for pragmatic reasons, the only remaining alternative appears to be fiat money not directly backed by any commodity. One may argue that the supply (or increase) of fiat money should somehow be linked to the gross domestic product, but this can be abandoned from the outright for many reasons: there is no direct control of fiat money once the system is set \ldblquote into motion.\rdblquote  Indeed, the fiat money created by the financial sector, or by the aggregate of property, by far outnumbers any kind of economic indicator even weakly linked to the gross domestic product. So, fiat money can only be backed by the belief in it alone.\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 8\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Anything that can go wrong, will go wrong\par
\par\par}{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f16\\begin\{chapterquote\} ... \\end\{chapterquote\}}]\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Everybody familiar with mountineering can appreciate Jack Sack\rquote s {\xe{\v Sack, Jack}} adage, later known as {\xe{\v Murphy\rquote s law}} Murphy\rquote s law, that \ldblquote Anything that can possibly go wrong, does.\rdblquote  So, by analogy, what goes wrong in economies, in particular with respect to money? \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 In short, it is the various forms of money multiplication that eventually degrades and annihilates the money supply. I will not bore the reader with historic evidence; there exist excellent introductions into the subject\~{Davies} (2002). (See also Zalenga\rquote s\~{Zarlenga} (2002) and Deutsch\rquote s\~{Deutsch} (2006) German somewhat controversial, revisionistic accounts of the subject.) Let me just enumerate several ways of wacking the monetary system; every reader can point out other petty schemes.\par
{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab If money is physically presented by commodities considered \ldblquote precious\rdblquote  and \ldblquote very valuable,\rdblquote  such as gold or silver coins, degredation is \ldblquote achieved\rdblquote  by putting less and less of that commodities into a unit of money while maintaining its nominal value.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab If money is based on commodities considered \ldblquote precious\rdblquote  and \ldblquote very valuable,\rdblquote  which are {\scaps0\b0\i indirectly represented} by notes {\scaps0\b0\i directly referring} to the commodities with an allegidly fixed amount of commodity per note \emdash  possibly associated with the promise to redeem the commodity upon presentation of the note \emdash  degredation is \ldblquote achieved\rdblquote  by printing more and more notes referring to a constant ammount of commodities. This is often referred to as \ldblquote commodity based money.\rdblquote  Finally, {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab seduce the public into not using, and not \ldblquote hoarding\rdblquote  the commodity by making them believe it is worthless;\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab stop redeeming the notes for the commodity;\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab prohibit the private possession and use of that commodity.\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab If money is partly based on commodities considered \ldblquote precious\rdblquote  and \ldblquote very valuable,\rdblquote  do so as before: print more notes per amount commodity.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab If \ldblquote fiat\rdblquote  money is based on the pure believe in it, print more money by multiplying it in various \ldblquote intelligent\rdblquote  ways; e.g., {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab by the {\i fractional reserve system}\~{Nichols} (1992) {\xe{\v fractional reserve system}};\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab by writing \ldblquote Love Letters\rdblquote  {\xe{\v Love Letters}} \emdash  i.e., by mutual exchange of \ldblquote I Owe You\rdblquote s {\xe{\v I Owe You}} and using these Love Letters as collaterals for money via monetization if you can find a rating agency {\xe{\v rating agency}} and a central bank {\xe{\v central bank}} willing to cooperate\~{Sibert} (2010); {Flannery} (2009); {P{\'e1}ll {\i et\~al.}} (2009);\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 \bullet\tab by packaging (e.g. houshold or mortgage) debt into bonds, if you can find a rating agency {\xe{\v rating agency}} willing to cooperate, and a customer willing to buy this bundled debt.\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab by counterfeits; indeed the only difference between counterfeit and \ldblquote legal\rdblquote  multiplication is the source of money. But even in this respect the differences tend to become obscure, as for instance during World War II allegedly the {\scaps0\b0\i Banca d\rquote Italia} {\xe{\v Banca d\rquote Italia}} counterfeited its own money by issuing the same securities twice with identical registered numbers and codes.\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb100 \fi0 There are numerous other ways to wack the money supply; the aforementioned are just commonly used examples. Many of the world\rquote s most clever minds \emdash  in particular also physicists and mathematians allured by relatively large salaries and benefits \emdash  breed over new schemes to legally multiply the monetary base, thereby contributing to its deterioration of the monetary base. Microeconomically this makes sense; after all if you dont do it, somebody else surely would.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Money multiplication effectively yields a general taxation of the public in favor of the issuer of money. The reason for this is that the former can buy less with with the amount of money they hold, as the overall price of assets and goods eventually increases.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Money multiplication also effectively amounts to a pyramid (Ponzi) scheme, as the earlier money buys more that the later money, due to an increase of it.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The only theoretical but impractical way of avoiding these pitfalls is to stick to the physical commodities as a medium of exchange. Alas, for a variety of reasons, e.g., for large-scale international trade, for security reasons, as well as for counterfeight and authentification reasons (\ldblquote who knows if this really is gold and not counterfeit? \rdblquote ) this is hardly impossible in a general setup. For instance, who assures that \ldblquote electronic gold\rdblquote  is really entirely backed by physical gold, and not just multiplied and thus merely partially covered?  Whom could you trust?  It is not too unreasonable to suspect that, in the long run, nobody and no institution \emdash  public or private \emdash  can be trusted. Government authorities, in particular, have a very bad record in money multiplication.\par
\page{}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 Chapter 9\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Summary and outlook\par
\par\par}{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f16\\begin\{chapterquote\} ... \\end\{chapterquote\}}]\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Some very general options for monetary systems have been enumerated and compared. The creation of present fiat money {\scaps0\b0\i via monetization,} as well as its appropriation in various setups has been discussed. We have identified private banks as the main source of money through monetization. Thereby, subject to reserve constraints, banks absorb (debt related to) assets of value and in exchange issue fiat money in the form of quantity information in deposit money accounts. The asset value is inevitably determined by subjective beliefs and fantasies loosely bound by market constraints. One may imagine such a monetary system as being \ldblquote suspended in thought;\rdblquote  its continuity, floating and benign evolution being guaranteed by common faith.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Any such system is vulnerable to crises and business cycles. For instance, as asset values are subject to disinformation, fraudulent manipulation or hype in anticipation of future profits or losses, there may be positive and negative feedbacks resulting in price settlements pushing certain equity segments far beyond a stable equilibrium with respect to the rest of the markets.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Inevitably, the interest levied by banks in return for money created via monetizing debt systematically reallocates resources toward the financial institutions, and away from industrial and manual production, farming and labor.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 In prosperous times the abundance of fiat money guarantees a continuation of economic growth and individual welfare. However, some very elementary dynamical tendencies drive economic systems into crises. One of these tendencies is the Matthews Effect {\xe{\v Matthews Effect}} observed in many other configuration\~{Merton} (1968): it is the {\i cumulative advantage,} the {\i accumulation} of desirable entities at very few locations, accompanied by a {\i thinning out} of these entities everywhere else; sometimes stated as \ldblquote the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer\rdblquote \~{Citigroup} (2006).\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Another common illusion is the belief that Adam Smith\rquote s \ldblquote invisible hand\rdblquote  always works for the \ldblquote greater good\rdblquote  of economies; when in reality economic players are confronted with boundless, relentless greed and prisoner\rquote s dilemmas of all sorts.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Unfortunately, the alternatives appear to be even more troublesome than the present state of affairs. Any system based on interest-free fiat money creation, in order to avoid hyperinflation through excessive borrowing associated with \ldblquote free\rdblquote  debt, has either to rely on unjustifiable privileges or chance. And any system based on commodity money is heavily dependent on the quantity of commodities, and also incapable of waging or defending against (economic) war through the effective monetization of future loot or loss.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 So, what are the political, economic and social options?  Ought we, for instance, curb banks in their possibilities to create money?  Maybe we should, but if we overdo we cripple our economies by penalizing investments. If we do not regulate them at all, we stimulate the natural greediness of people, and foster pyramid scheme type unsustainable business models which assume ever increasing prices (money supply) resulting in economic crises.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The regulatory fine-tuning requires criteria of performance and reliable theories to forecast market behaviors; unfortunately we do not have any such instruments. But even if such criteria and regulatory instruments will exist in the future \emdash  which I doubt \emdash  there might simply be not any possibility to prevent economic crises and the resulting business cycles. This may be due to the inherent self-referential character of economic processes, which tend to amplify gains and losses through market hysteria, and which \emdash  in a diagonalization type manner\~{Smullyan} (1992) \emdash  are capable of counteracting the very regulatory procedures which are established.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Ought we thus accept occasional monetary crises and the associated business cycles?  I am afraid, yes.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Ought we accept imbalances of appropriation and a (geometric) redistribution of wealth toward \ldblquote the rich,\rdblquote  and in particular toward the banks and other financial institutions, as well as other aggregates commanding ever increasing amounts of money?  I am afraid, yes. I am unaware of any measure which could counterbalance the accumulation of wealth, also called the Matthews Effect, in the long run.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 There are quite serious political connotations to keep in mind: As money is the representation of a particular type of asset value, those who control and create money have equivalent capabilities to deplore economic and political power. It is quite commonly accepted that societies and empires may be \ldblquote steered\rdblquote  or even dominated by those who have money\~{Quigley} (1966); to the effect that \ldblquote money\rdblquote  renders entire governments; or at least corrupts or overthrows them. At some point we might wake up and realize that, facilitated by money, our \ldblquote democracies\rdblquote  have turned into plutonomies\~{Citigroup} (2005); {Citigroup} (2006) and oligarchies.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 To close this brief discussion in a positive, pragmatic mood, let me mention ways to legally get rich along the monetary lines discussed, without relying on inherited wealth: {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab One of the first and foremost opportunities would be to acquire or start up a central bank if some country would allow one to do so; possibly in exchange of a credit line. \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab A fallback option would be to acquire or start up a noncentral bank, or some organization issuing notes which are accepted as some form of exchange payment. \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab A third option would be to wait until chance singles one out as a beneficiary of the Matthews Effect. (This may never happen.) \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab A fourth option would be to \ldblquote ride the tides of inflation and deflation,\rdblquote  and dynamically increase debt levels, which must be associated with sustainable levels of interest payments, at proper times. Without inside information, this, however, may be just as risky as participating in a Ponzi-type pyramid game. \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 On a more existentialist and personal level, I propose to consider money as one of Sisyphus\rquote  more absurd assignments\~{Camus} (1942).\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {toc}{}\par
{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 {\plain\b\fs32 References}\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \li450\fi0 noop [0]{secondoftwo}href[1]{#1@endlink}url [0]{\lquote \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 12\lquote $12\lquote &12\lquote #12\lquote {\field{\*\fldinst EQ \\O(1, {\up6 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 36 \\f "MT Extra" \\h}{\fldrslt }}})}{\fldrslt }}2\lquote _12\lquote %12}startlink[1]{}endlink[0]{}ifxundefined { }Doi [1]{#1@endlink}\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {P.\~A. Samuelson} and secondoftwo{author} {W.\~D. Nordhaus}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Economics}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {McGraw-Hill}, secondoftwo{address} {New York, NY}, secondoftwo{year} {1948-2004}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {D.\~Begg}, secondoftwo{author} {S.\~Fischer},  and secondoftwo{author} {R.\~Dornbusch}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Economics (Eigth Edition)}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {McGraw-Hill}, secondoftwo{address} {London}, secondoftwo{year} {2005}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {A.\~Kyrer} and secondoftwo{author} {W.\~Penker}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {{V}olkswirtschaftslehre. {G}rundz{\'fc}ge der {W}irtschaftstheorie und -politik}}}, secondoftwo{edition} {6th} ed. (secondoftwo{publisher} {Oldenbourg}, secondoftwo{address} {M{\'fc}nchen, Wien}, secondoftwo{year} {2000}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {R.\~K. Merton}, }sanitize@url Doi {10.1126/science.159.3810.56} {secondoftwo{journal} {secondoftwo{journal} {Science}, }{\b secondoftwo{volume} {159}}, secondoftwo{pages} {56} (secondoftwo{year} {1968})} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {F.\~Soddy}, }@{http://www.archive.org/details/roleofmoney032861mbp} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Role of Money. {W}hat it should be, contrasted with what it has become}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {George Routledge and Sons, Ltd.}, secondoftwo{address} {London}, secondoftwo{year} {1934}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {S.\~Freud}, }in @@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{booktitle} {{G}esammelte {W}erke. {C}hronologisch geordnet. {A}chter {B}and. {W}erke aus den {J}ahren 1909\endash 1913}}}, secondoftwo{editor} {edited by secondoftwo{editor} {A.\~Freud}, secondoftwo{editor} {E.\~Bibring}, secondoftwo{editor} {W.\~Hoffer}, secondoftwo{editor} {E.\~Kris},  and secondoftwo{editor} {O.\~Isakower}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Fischer}, secondoftwo{address} {Frankfurt am Main}, secondoftwo{year} {1999}) pp. secondoftwo{pages} {376\endash 387} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {G.\~Soros}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Alchemy of Finance: Reading the Mind of the Market}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {John Wiley & Sons}, secondoftwo{address} {Hoboken, New Jersey}, secondoftwo{year} {1987, 1994, 2003}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {J.-P. Bouchaud}, }sanitize@url Doi {10.1038/4551181a} {secondoftwo{journal} {secondoftwo{journal} {Nature}, }{\b secondoftwo{volume} {455}}, secondoftwo{pages} {1181} (secondoftwo{year} {2008})}, ISSN secondoftwo{issn} {0028-0836} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {A.\~Sibert}, }@{http://voxeu.org/index.php? q=node/5059} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {Love letters from {I}celand: Accountability of the {E}urosystem},\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {2010}), secondoftwo{note} {vox posting from 18 May 2010} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {M.\~J. Flannery}, }@{http://sic.althingi.is/pdf/RNAvefVidauki3Enska.pdf} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {{I}celand\'92s failed banks: A post-mortem},\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {2009}), secondoftwo{note} {report prepared for the Icelandic Special Investigation Commission, 9 March 2009} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {P{\'e1}ll}, secondoftwo{author} {G.\~Tryggvi},  and secondoftwo{author} {B.\~Sigr\'EDdur}, }@{http://sic.althingi.is/pdf/RNAvefurKafli21Enska.pdf} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {Causes of the collapse of the icelanldic banks \'96 responsibility, mistakes and negligence},\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {2009}), secondoftwo{note} {report prepared for the Icelandic Special Investigation Commission, 9 March 2009} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {{European Central Bank. Eurosystem}}, }@{http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2009/html/pr090305\\s\\do5({\fs16 2}).en.html} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {5 {M}arch 2009 - {E}urosystem monetary policy operations in 2008},\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {2009}), secondoftwo{note} {press Release} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {{Staff of the U.S. House of Representatives}}, }@{http://lccn.loc.gov/76602818} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Federal Reserve directors, a study of corporate and banking influence: staff report for the Committee on Banking, Currency and Housing, House of Representatives, 94th Congress, second session, August 1976}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {U.S. Government Printing Office}, secondoftwo{address} {Washington, D.C.}, secondoftwo{year} {1976}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {E.\~Schneider}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {{E}inf{\'fc}hrung in die {W}irtschaftstheorie III. {G}eld, {K}redit, {V}olkseinkommen und {B}esch{\'e4}ftigung}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {J.C.B.Mohr (Paul Siebeck)}, secondoftwo{address} {T{\'fc}bingen}, secondoftwo{year} {1952-1973}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {D.\~M. Nichols}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Modern Money Mechanics}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago}, secondoftwo{address} {Chicago}, secondoftwo{year} {1961, 1992}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {{European Central Bank. Eurosystem}}, }@{http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/gendoc2008en.pdf} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Implementation of Monetary Policy in the {EURO} Area}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {European Central Bank}, secondoftwo{address} {Frankfurt}, secondoftwo{year} {2008}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {{Federal Reserve}}, }@{http://www.frbdiscountwindow.org/acceptancecriteria.pdf} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {Discount window & payment system risk acceptance criteria for commonly pledged asset types},\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {2009}), secondoftwo{note} {{F}ederal {R}eserve release} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {R.\~C. Smith} and secondoftwo{author} {I.\~Walter}, }@{http://archive.nyu.edu/handle/2451/26532} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {Rating agencies: Is there an agency issue? }\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {2009}), secondoftwo{note} {fIN-01-003} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {E.\~B{\'f6}hm-Bawerk}, }@{http://www.archive.org/details/kapitalundkapita01bh} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {{K}apital und {K}apitalzins}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Kluwer Academic Publishers}, secondoftwo{year} {1884}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {B.\~P. Pesek} and secondoftwo{author} {T.\~R. Saving}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Foundations of Money and Banking}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {The Macmillan Company}, secondoftwo{address} {New York}, secondoftwo{year} {1968}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {H.\~C. Binswanger}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {{D}ie {W}achstumsspirale}}}, secondoftwo{edition} {2nd} ed. (secondoftwo{publisher} {Metropolis-Verlag}, secondoftwo{address} {Marburg}, secondoftwo{year} {2006}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {B.\~Champ} and secondoftwo{author} {S.\~Freeman}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Modelling Monetary Economies}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Cambridge University Press}, secondoftwo{address} {Cambridge, UK}, secondoftwo{year} {2004}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {J.\~T. {Noonan, jr.}}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The scholastic analysis of usury}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Harvard University Press}, secondoftwo{address} {Cambridge, Mass.}, secondoftwo{year} {1957}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {A.\~M. Wei{\'df}}, }in sanitize@url Doi {10.1007/3-211-28108-8\\s\\do5({\fs16 5})} {{\i secondoftwo{booktitle} {{G}eld- und {K}reditwesen im {S}piegel der {W}issenschaft}}}, secondoftwo{editor} {edited by secondoftwo{editor} {U.\~Aichhorn}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Springer}, secondoftwo{address} {Vienna}, secondoftwo{year} {2005}) pp. secondoftwo{pages} {123\endash 156} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {M.\~Hanke}, }in sanitize@url Doi {10.1007/3-211-28108-8\\s\\do5({\fs16 6})} {{\i secondoftwo{booktitle} {{G}eld- und {K}reditwesen im {S}piegel der {W}issenschaft}}}, secondoftwo{editor} {edited by secondoftwo{editor} {U.\~Aichhorn}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Springer}, secondoftwo{address} {Vienna}, secondoftwo{year} {2005}) pp. secondoftwo{pages} {157\endash 175} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {M.\~Friedman}, }in sanitize@url Doi {10.1057/9780230226203.1374} {{\i secondoftwo{booktitle} {The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Second Edition}}}, secondoftwo{editor} {edited by secondoftwo{editor} {S.\~N. Durlauf} and secondoftwo{editor} {L.\~E. Blume}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Palgrave Macmillan}, secondoftwo{year} {2008}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {C.\~M. Reinhart} and secondoftwo{author} {K.\~S. Rogoff}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Princeton University Press}, secondoftwo{address} {Princeton, New Jersey}, secondoftwo{year} {2009}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {W.\~Bonner} and secondoftwo{author} {A.\~Wiggin}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Empire of Debt: The Rise of an Epic Financial Crisis}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Wiley & Sons, Inc.}, secondoftwo{address} {Hoboken, New Jersey}, secondoftwo{year} {2006}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {J.\~E. Stiglitz} and secondoftwo{author} {L.\~Bilmes}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Three Trillion Dollar War}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {W. W. Norton}, secondoftwo{address} {New York}, secondoftwo{year} {2008}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {R.\~Duncan}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Dollar Crisis: Causes, Consequences, Cures, Revised and Updated}}}, secondoftwo{edition} {2nd} ed. (secondoftwo{publisher} {Wiley}, secondoftwo{address} {New York}, secondoftwo{year} {2005}) ISBN secondoftwo{isbn} {978-0-470-82170-1} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {L.\~H. Kauffman}, }sanitize@url Doi {10.1016/0140-1750(87)90034-0} {secondoftwo{journal} {secondoftwo{journal} {Journal of Social and Biological Structures}, }{\b secondoftwo{volume} {10}}, secondoftwo{pages} {53} (secondoftwo{year} {1987})}, ISSN secondoftwo{issn} {0140-1750} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {K.\~G{\'f6}del}, }@@noop {} {secondoftwo{journal} {secondoftwo{journal} {Monatshefte f{\'fc}r Mathematik und Physik}, }{\b secondoftwo{volume} {38}}, secondoftwo{pages} {173} (secondoftwo{year} {1931})}, secondoftwo{note} {{E}nglish translation in Ref.\~{G{\'f6}del} (1986), and in Ref.\~{Davis} (1965)} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {A.\~M. {T}uring}, }sanitize@url Doi {10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230, 10.1112/plms/s2-43.6.544} {secondoftwo{journal} {secondoftwo{journal} {Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2}, }{\b secondoftwo{volume} {42, 43}}, secondoftwo{pages} {230} (secondoftwo{year} {1936-7 and 1937})}, secondoftwo{note} {reprinted in Ref.\~{Davis} (1965)} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {M.\~Davis}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Computability and Unsolvability}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {McGraw-Hill}, secondoftwo{address} {New York}, secondoftwo{year} {1958}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {R.\~M. Smullyan}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {{G}{\'f6}del\rquote s Incompleteness Theorems}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Oxford University Press}, secondoftwo{address} {New York, New York}, secondoftwo{year} {1992}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {R.\~Sherr}, secondoftwo{author} {K.\~T. Bainbridge},  and secondoftwo{author} {H.\~H. Anderson}, }sanitize@url Doi {10.1103/PhysRev.60.473} {secondoftwo{journal} {secondoftwo{journal} {Physical Review}, }{\b secondoftwo{volume} {60}}, secondoftwo{pages} {473} (secondoftwo{year} {1941})} bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {J.\~G.\~K. Wicksell}, }@{http://www.archive.org/details/interestandprice033322mbp} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Interest and prices. {A} study of the causes regulating the value of money}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Macmillan And Company Limited}, secondoftwo{address} {London}, secondoftwo{year} {1936}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {Citigroup}, }@{http://www.scribd.com/doc/6674234/Citigroup-Oct-16-2005-Plutonomy-Report-Part-1} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {Plutonomy: Buying luxury, explaining global imbalances},\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {October 16, 2005}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {G.\~Davies}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {A History of Money: From Ancient Times to Present Day}}}, secondoftwo{edition} {3rd} ed. (secondoftwo{publisher} {University of Wales Press}, secondoftwo{address} {Cardiff}, secondoftwo{year} {2002}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {S.\~A. Zarlenga}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Lost Science of Money: The Mythology of Money, The Story of Power}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {American Monetary Institute}, secondoftwo{address} {Valatie, NY}, secondoftwo{year} {2002}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {R.\~Deutsch}, }@{http://wiki.freiheitsforum.com/wiki/Die\\s\\do5({\fs16 G})eldfalle} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Das Silberkomplott}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Kopp}, secondoftwo{address} {Rottenburg, BRD}, secondoftwo{year} {2006}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {Citigroup}, }@{http://www.scribd.com/doc/6674229/Citigroup-Mar-5-2006-Plutonomy-Report-Part-2} {\ldblquote secondoftwo{title} {Reviting plutonomy: The rich getting richer},\rdblquote  } (secondoftwo{year} {March 5, 2006}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {C.\~Quigley}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Tragedy and Hope: A History of the World in Our Time}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Macmillan}, secondoftwo{address} {New York}, secondoftwo{year} {1966}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {A.\~Camus}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {Le Mythe de Sisyphe (English translation: The Myth of Sisyphus)}}} (secondoftwo{year} {1942}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {K.\~G{\'f6}del}, }in @@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{booktitle} {Collected Works. Publications 1929-1936. Volume {I}}}}, secondoftwo{editor} {edited by secondoftwo{editor} {S.\~Feferman}, secondoftwo{editor} {J.\~W. Dawson}, secondoftwo{editor} {S.\~C. Kleene}, secondoftwo{editor} {G.\~H. Moore}, secondoftwo{editor} {R.\~M. Solovay},  and secondoftwo{editor} {J.\~van Heijenoort}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Oxford University Press}, secondoftwo{address} {Oxford}, secondoftwo{year} {1986}) bibitem NoStop\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi-450 secondoftwo{author} {secondoftwo{author} {M.\~Davis}, }@@noop {} {{\i secondoftwo{title} {The Undecidable. Basic Papers on Undecidable, Unsolvable Problems and Computable Functions}}} (secondoftwo{publisher} {Raven Press}, secondoftwo{address} {Hewlett, N.Y.}, secondoftwo{year} {1965}) bibitem NoStop\par
}\page {\field{\*\fldinst{INDEX \\c 2}}{\fldrslt{}}}}}
