{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff0\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset0 STIXGeneral;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\cs10 \additive\ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 Part;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s8\qr\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext8 rightpar;}
{\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext9 centerpar;}
{\s10\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext10 leftpar;}
{\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equation;}
{\s12\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationNum;}
{\s13\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlign;}
{\s14\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlignNum;}
{\s15\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArray;}
{\s16\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArrayNum;}
{\s17\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 theorem;}
{\s18\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 bitmapCenter;}
{\s20\qc\sb240\sa240\b\f0\fs36 \sbasedon0\snext21 Title;}
{\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 author;}
{\s22\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext22 footer;}
{\s23\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext23 header;}
{\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 caption;}
{\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 Figure;}
{\s32\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext32 Table;}
{\s33\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext33 Tabular;}
{\s34\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext34 Tabbing;}
{\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext35 Quote;}
{\s38\ql\widctlpar\f3\fs20 \snext38 verbatim;}
{\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext46 List;}
{\s47\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext47 List 1;}
{\s50\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 latex picture;}
{\s51\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 subfigure;}
{\s61\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibheading;}
{\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibitem;}
{\s64\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext64 endnotes;}
{\s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext65 footnote text;}
{\s66\qj\fi-170\li454\lin454\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext66 endnote text;}
{\cs62\super \additive\sbasedon10 footnote reference;}
{\cs63\super \additive\sbasedon10 endnote reference;}
{\s67\ql\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext67 acronym;}
{\s70\qc\sa120\b\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext71 abstract title;}
{\s71\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 abstract;}
{\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 contents_heading;}
{\s81\ql\li425\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb240\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20\b \sbasedon0\snext82 toc 1;}
{\s82\ql\li512\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext83 toc 2;}
{\s83\ql\li1024\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext84 toc 3;}
{\s84\ql\li1536\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext85 toc 4;}
{\s85\ql\li2048\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 5;}
{\s86\ql\li2560\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 6;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was 2011-m.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 2.1.1 r1158 (2011-01-31 21:25:00 UTC) on Tue Feb 14 17:07:39 2012
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f0\fs20\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl2680\margr2700\margt2540\margb12760\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f0\aftnnar
{\column
\pard\plain\s20\qc\sb240\sa240\b\f0\fs36\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Mathematical Methods of Theoretical Physics{\cs62\super 1}
{\*\footnote\pard \s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs20{\cs62\super1} Based on the Vienna University of Technology course {\i Mathematische Methoden der Physik}.}
\par
\pard\plain\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 [\par
\pard\plain\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 \chdate \par
{\column
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f3\\begin\{fullwidth\} ... \\end\{fullwidth\}}]\par
}\pard\plain\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0  Contents\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\field{\*\fldinst TOC \\o "1-3" }{\fldrslt }}
\par
\page
\pard\plain\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0  List of Figures\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\field{\*\fldinst TOC \\f f }{\fldrslt }}
\par
\page
\pard\plain\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0  List of Tables\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\field{\*\fldinst TOC \\f t }{\fldrslt }}
\par
\par \pard {\page
\pard\plain\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \li512\ri512\fi0  {14}{18}\scaps0\i {This book is dedicated to the memory of \par
\pard\plain\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li512\ri512\fi0 \scaps0\i Prof. Dr.math. Ernst Paul Specker \endash  Amez\endash Droz,\par
\pard\plain\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li512\ri512\fi0 \scaps0\i {\scaps0\b0\i 11.2.1920 \endash  10.12.2011} } \par
}\par \pard \par \pard \par \pard {\page
\pard\plain\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \li512\ri512\fi0  {14}{18}\scaps0\i {It is not enough to have no concept, one must also be capable of expressing it. } {From the German original in {\i0 Karl Kraus, in {\i Die Fackel} {\i0\scaps0\b 697}, 60 (1925)}: \ldblquote Es gen\'fcgt nicht, keinen Gedanken zu haben: man muss ihn auch ausdr\'fccken k\'f6nnen.\rdblquote } \par
}\par \pard \par \pard \page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Chapter\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Introduction\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {This is a first attempt} to provide some written material of a course in mathemathical methods of theoretical physics. I am presenting this course to an undergraduate audience at the Vienna University of Technology. Only God knows (see Ref. 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Aquinas \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{12}{1981}{{Aquinas}}{{}}}}}
] part one, question 14, article 13; and also Ref. 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_specker_60 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{124}{1960}{{Specker}}{{}}}}}
], p. 243) if I manage to teach them the subject!  I kindly ask the perplexed to please be patient, do not panic under any circumstances, and do not allow themselves to be too upset with mistakes, omissions & other problems of this text. At the end of the day, everything will be fine, and in the long run we will be dead anyway.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {I am releasing this} text to the public domain because it is my conviction and experience that content can no longer be held back, and access to it be restricted, as its creators see fit. On the contrary, we experience a push toward so much content that we can hardly bear this information flood, so we have to be selective and restrictive rather than aquisitive. I hope that there are some readers out there who actually enjoy and profit from the text, in whatever form and way they find appropriate.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {My own encounter} with many researchers of different fields and different degrees of formalization has convinced me that there is no single way of formally comprehending a subject 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_anderson_73 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{10}{1972}{{Anderson}}{{}}}}}
]. With regards to formal rigour, there appears to be a rather questionable chain of contempt \endash  all too often theoretical physicists suspiciously look down at the experimentalists, mathematical physicists suspiciously look down at the theoreticians, and mathematicians suspiciously look down at the mathematical physicists. I have even experienced the doubts formal logicians expressed about their collegues in mathematics!  For an anectodal evidence, take the claim of a very prominant member of the mathematical physics community, who once dryly remarked in front of a fully packed audience, \ldblquote what other people call \lquote proof\rquote  I call \lquote conjecture\rquote ! \rdblquote \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {So please be aware} that not all I present here will be acceptable to everybody; for various reasons. Some people will claim that I am too confusing and utterly formalistic, others will claim my arguments are in desparate need of rigour. Many formally fascinated readers will demand to go deeper into the meaning of the subjects; others may want some easy-to-identify pragmatic, syntactic rules of deriving results. I apologise to both groups from the onset. This is the best I can do; from certain different perspectives, others, maybe even some tutors or students, might perform much better.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {I am calling} for a greater unity in physics; as well as for a greater esteem on \ldblquote both sides of the same effort;\rdblquote  I am also opting for more pragmatism; one that acknowledges the mutual benefits and oneness of theoretical and empirical physical world perceptions. Schr\u1094?dinger 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_schroed_natgr \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{117}{1954}{{Schr{\'f6}dinger}}{{}}}}}
] cites Democritus with arguing against a too great separation of the intellect ({}, dianoia) and the senses ({}, aitheseis). In fragment D 125 from Galen 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Diels_fdv \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{39}{1906}{{Diels}}{{}}}}}
], p. 408, footnote 125 , the intellect claims \ldblquote ostensibly there is color, ostensibly sweetness, ostensibly bitterness, actually only atoms and the void;\rdblquote  to which the senses retort: \ldblquote Poor intellect, do you hope to defeat us while from us you borrow your evidence?  Your victory is your defeat.\rdblquote  {German: Nachdem D. [[Demokritos]] sein Mi\'dftrauen gegen die Sinneswahrnehmungen in dem Satze ausgesprochen: \lquote Scheinbar (d. i. konventionell) ist Farbe, scheinbar S\'fc\'dfigkeit, scheinbar Bitterkeit: wirklich nur Atome und Leeres\rdblquote  l\'e4\'dft er die Sinne gegen den Verstand reden: \lquote Du armer Verstand, von uns nimmst du deine Beweisst\'fccke und willst uns damit besiegen?  Dein Sieg ist dein Fall! \rquote }\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Professor ernst Specker} from the ETH Z\'fcrich once remarked that, of the many books of David Hilbert, most of them carry his name first, and the name(s) of his co-author(s) appear second, although the subsequent author(s) had actually written these books; the only exception of this rule being Courant and Hilbert\rquote s 1924 book {\i Methoden der mathematischen Physik}, comprising around 1000 densly packed pages, which allegedly none of these authors had really written. It appears to be some sort of collective effort of scholars from the University of G\'f6ttingen.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {So, in sharp distinction} from these comprehensive efforts, I most humbly present my own version of what is important for standard courses of contemporary physics. Thereby, I am quite aware that, not dissimilar with some attempts of that sort undertaken so far, I might fail miserably. Because even if I manage to induce some interest, affaction, passion and understanding in the audience \endash  as Danny Greenberger put it, inevitably four hundred years from now, all our present physical theories of today will appear transient 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_lakatosch \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{78}{1978}{{Lakatos}}{{}}}}}
], if not laughable. And thus in the long run, my efforts will be forgotten; and some other brave, courageous guy will continue attempting to (re)present the most important mathematical methods in theoretical physics.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Having in mind} this saddening piece of historic evidence, and for as long as we are here on Earth, let us carry on and start doing what we are supposed to be doing well; just as Krishna in Chapter XI:32,33 of the {\scaps0\b0\i Bhagavad Gita} is quoted for insisting upon Arjuna to fight, telling him to {\i \ldblquote stand up, obtain glory!  Conquer your enemies, acquire fame and enjoy a prosperous kingdom. All these warriors have already been destroyed by me. You are only an instrument.\rdblquote }\par
{\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 { \fs50 } \par
}\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chapter {\*\bkmkstart BMch_uens}1{\*\bkmkend BMch_uens}\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 All things considered, it is mind-boggling why formalized thinking and numbers utilize our comprehension of nature. Even today people muse about the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_wigner \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{139}{1960}{{Wigner}}{{}}}}}
].\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Zeno of Elea and Parmenides, for instance, wondered how there can be motion, either in universe which is infinitely divisible, or discrete. Because, in the dense case, the slightest finite move would require an infinity of actions. Likewise in the discrete case, how can there be motion if everything is not moving at all times 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_zeno \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{82}{1936}{{Lee}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_benna_62 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{18}{1962}{{Benacerraf}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_gruenbaum_68 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{59}{1968}{{Gr{\'fc}nbaum}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Sainsbury \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{109}{2009}{{Sainsbury}}{{}}}}}
]? \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 A related question regards the physical limit state of a hypothetical lamp, considered by Thomson 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_thom_54 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{130}{1954}{{Thomson}}{{}}}}}
], with ever decreasing switching cycles. For the sake of perplexion, take Neils Henrik Abel\rquote s verdict denouncing that (Letter to Holmboe, January 16, 1826 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Hardy_1949 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{61}{1949}{{Hardy}}{{}}}}}
]), {\i \ldblquote divergent series are the invention of the devil, and it is shameful to base on them any demonstration whatsoever.\rdblquote } This, of course, did neither prevent Abel nor too many other discussants to investigate these devilish inventions.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 If one encodes the physical states of the Thomson lamp by \ldblquote 0\rdblquote  and \ldblquote 1,\rdblquote  associated with the lamp \ldblquote on\rdblquote  and \ldblquote off,\rdblquote  respectively, and the switching process with the concatenation of \ldblquote +1\rdblquote  and \ldblquote -1\rdblquote  performed so far, then the divergent infinite series associated with the Thomson lamp is the Leibniz series {\par
\pard\plain\s12\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\tqc\tx3450\tqr\tx6900\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \tab
\tab{\b0 ({\*\bkmkstart BM2009_fiftyfifty_1}1{\*\bkmkend BM2009_fiftyfifty_1})}\par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 which is just a particular instance of a geometric series (see below) with the common ratio \ldblquote -1.\rdblquote  Here, \ldblquote A\rdblquote  indicates the Abel sum 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Hardy_1949 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{61}{1949}{{Hardy}}{{}}}}}
] obtained from a \ldblquote continuation\rdblquote  of the geometric series, or alternatively, by {}.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 As this shows, formal sums of the Leibnitz type ({\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BM2009_fiftyfifty_1 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{1.1}}}) require specifications which could make them unique. But has this \ldblquote specification by continuation\rdblquote  any kind of physical meaning? \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 In modern days, similar arguments have been translated into the proposal for infinity machines by Blake 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Blake26 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{23}{1926}{{Blake}}{{}}}}}
], p. 651, and Weyl 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_weyl_49 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{137}{1949}{{Weyl}}{{}}}}}
], pp. 41-42, which could solve many very difficult problems by searching through unbounded recursively enumerable cases. To achive this physically, ultrarelativistic methods suggest to put observers in \ldblquote fast orbits\rdblquote  or throw them toward black holes 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_pit_90 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{99}{1990}{{Pitowsky}}{{}}}}}
].\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The Pythagoreans are often cited to have believed that the universe is natural numbers or simple fractions thereof, and thus physics is just a part of mathematics; or that there is no difference between these realms. They took their conception of numbers and world-as-numbers so seriously that the existence of irrational numbers which cannot be written as some ratio of integers shocked them; so much so that they allegedly drowned the poor guy who had discovered this fact. That is a typical case in which the metaphysical belief in one\rquote s own construction of the world overwhelms critical thinking; and what should be wisely taken as an epistemic finding is taken to be ontologic truth.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The connection between physics and formalism has been debated by Bridgman 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_bridgman \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{29}{1934}{{Bridgman}}{{}}}}}
], Feynman 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_feynman_computation \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{48}{1996}{{Feynman}}{{}}}}}
], and Landauer 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_landauer \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{79}{1991}{{Landauer}}{{}}}}}
], among many others. The question, for instance, is imminent whether we should take the formalism very serious and literal, using it as a guide to new territories, which might even appear absurd, inconsistent and mind-boggling; just like {\i Alice\rquote s Adventures in Wonderland.} Should we expect that all the wild things formally imaginable have a physical realization? \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Note that the formalist Hilbert 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_hilbert_26 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{67}{1926}{{Hilbert}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_cantor_set \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{35}{1895}{{Cantor}}{{}}}}}
], p. 170, is often quoted as claiming that nobody shall ever expel mathematicians from the paradise created by Cantor\rquote s set theory. {German original: {\i \ldblquote Aus dem Paradies, das Cantor uns geschaffen, soll uns niemand vertreiben k\'f6nnen.\rdblquote }} In Cantor\rquote s \ldblquote naive set theory\rdblquote  definition, \ldblquote a set is a collection into a whole of definite distinct objects of our intuition or of our thought. The objects are called the elements (members) of the set.\rdblquote  {Cantor\rquote s German original: \ldblquote Unter einer \ldblquote Menge\rdblquote  verstehen wir jede Zusammenfassung {} von bestimmten wohlunterschiedenen Objekten {} unsrer Anschauung oder unseres Denkens (welche die \ldblquote Elemente\rdblquote  von {} genannt werden) zu einem Ganzen.\rdblquote } If one allows substitution and self-reference 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_smullyan_78 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{121}{1992{a}}{{Smullyan}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_smullyan_92 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{122}{1992{b}}{{Smullyan}}{{}}}}}
], this definition turns out to be inconsistent; that is self-contradictory \endash  for instance Russel\rquote s paradoxical \ldblquote set of all sets that are not members of themselves\rdblquote  qualifies as set in the Cantorian approach. In praising the set theoretical paradise, Hilbert must have been well aware of the inconsistencies and problems that plagued Cantorian style set theory, but he fully dissented and refused to abandon its stimulus.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Is there a similar pathos also in theoretical physics? \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Maybe our physical capacities are limited by our mathematical fantasy alone?  Who knows? \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 For instance, could we make use of the Banach-Tarski paradox 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_springerlink_10_1007_BF03023740 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{50}{1988}{{French}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_wagon1 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{134}{1986}{{Wagon}}{{}}}}}
] as a sort of ideal production line?  The Banach-Tarski paradox makes use of the fact that in the continuum \ldblquote it is (nonconstructively) possible\rdblquote  to transform any given volume of three-dimensional space into any other desired shape, form and volume \endash  in particular also to double the original volume \endash  by transforming finite subsets of the original volume through isometries, that is, distance preserving mappings such as translations and rotations. This, of course, could also be perceived as a merely abstract paradox of infinity, somewhat similar to Hilbert\rquote s hotel.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 By the way, Hilbert\rquote s hotel 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_rucker \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{108}{1982}{{Rucker}}{{}}}}}
] has a countable infinity of hotel rooms. It is always capable to acommodate a newcomer by shifting all other guests residing in any given room to the room with the next room number. Maybe we will never be able to build an analogue of Hilbert\rquote s hotel, but maybe we will be able to do that one far away day. {Anton Zeilinger has quoted Tony Klein as saying that \ldblquote every system is a perfect simulacrum of itself.\rdblquote }\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 After all, science finally succeeded to do what the alchemists sought for so long: we are capable of producing gold from mercury 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_PhysRev_60_473 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{120}{1941}{{Sherr et\~al.}}{{Sherr, Bainbridge, and Anderson}}}}}
].\par
{\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 { \fs50 } \par
}\page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chapter {\*\bkmkstart BMch_mpm}2{\*\bkmkend BMch_mpm}\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Methodology and proof methods\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {For many theorems} there exist many proofs. For instance, the 4th edition of {\i Proofs from THE BOOK} 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_ziegler_aigner \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{4}{1998-2010}{{Aigner and Ziegler}}{{}}}}}
] lists six proofs of the infinity of primes (chapter 1). Chapter 19 refers to nearly a hundred proofs of the fundamental theorem of algebra, that every nonconstant polynomial with complex coefficients has at least one root in the field of complex numbers.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Which proofs,} if there exist many, somebody choses or prefers is often a question of taste and elegance, and thus a subjective decision. Some proofs are constructive 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_bridges_richman \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{28}{1987}{{Bridges and Richman}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_bishop \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{22}{1985}{{Bishop and Bridges}}{{}}}}}
] and computable 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_aberth_80 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{1}{1980}{{Aberth}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Weihrauch \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{135}{2000}{{Weihrauch}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_BHW08 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{27}{2008}{{Brattka et\~al.}}{{Brattka, Hertling, and Weihrauch}}}}}
] in the sense that a construction method is presented. Tractability is not an entirely completely different issue 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_kreisel \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{75}{1974}{{Kreisel}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_gandy2 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{51}{1980}{{Gandy}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_pit_90 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{99}{1990}{{Pitowsky}}{{}}}}}
] \endash  note that even \ldblquote higher\rdblquote  polynomial growth of temporal or space and memory resources of a computation with some parameter may result in a solution which is unattainable \ldblquote for all practical purposes\rdblquote  (fapp) 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_bell_a \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{16}{1990}{{Bell}}{{}}}}}
].\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {For those of us} with a rather limited amount of storage and memory, and with a lot of troubles and problems, is is quite consolating that it is not (always) necessary to be able to memorize all the proofs that are necessary for the deduction of a particular corollary or theorem which turns out to be useful for the physical task at hand. In some cases, though, it may be necessary to keep in mind the assumptions and derivation methods that such results are based upon. For example, how many readers may be able to immediately derive the simple power rule for derivation of polynomials \endash  that is, for any real coefficient {}, the derivative is given by {}?  Most of us would acknowledge to be aware of, and be able and happy to apply, this rule.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Let us just list} some concrete examples of the perplexing varieties of proof methods used today.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 For the sake of listing a mathematical proof method which does not have any \ldblquote constructive\rdblquote  or algorithmic flavour, consider a proof of the following theorem: {\i \ldblquote There exist irrational numbers {} with {}.\rdblquote }\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {\cf80 \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Consider the following proof:}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 case 1: {}; \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 case 2: {}, then {}.\par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The proof assumes the {\i law of the excluded middle,} which excludes all other cases but the two just listed. The question of which one of the two cases is correct; that is, which number is rational, remains unsolved in the context of the proof. \endash  Actually, a proof that case 2 is correct and {} is a transcendential was only found by Gelfond and Schneider in 1934!  {The Gelfond-Schneider theorem states that, if {} and {} are algebraic numbers that is, if {} and {} are roots of a non-zero polynomial in one variable with rational or equivalently, integer, coefficients with {} and if {} is not a rational number, then any value of {} is a transcendental number.}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {A typical proof by contradiction} is about the irrationality of {}.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {\cf80 \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Suppose that {} is rational (false); that is {} for some {}. Suppose further that {} and {} are coprime; that is, they have no common positive divisor other than 1 or, equivalently, if their greatest common divisor is 1. Squaring the (wrong) assumption {} yields {} and thus {}. We have two different cases: either {} is odd, or {} is even. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 case 1: suppose that {} is odd; that is {} for some {}; and thus {} is again odd (the square of an even number is again odd); but that cannot be, since {} equals {} and thus should be even; hence we arrive at a contradiction. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 case 2: suppose that {} is even; that is {} for some {}; and thus {} or {}. Now observe that by assumption, {} cannot be even (remember {} and {} are coprime, and {} is assumed to be even), so {} must be odd. By the same argument as in case 1 (for odd n), we arrive at a contradiction. By combining these two exhaustive cases 1 & 2, we arrive at a complete contradiction; the only consistent alternative being the irrationality of {}.\par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Still another issue} is whether it is better to have a proof of a \ldblquote true\rdblquote  mathematical statement rather than none. And what is truth \endash  can it be some revelation, a rare gift, such as seemingly in Sr\u299iniv\u257asa Aiyang\u257ar R\u257am\u257anujan\rquote s case? \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {There exist ancient} and yet rather intuitive \endash  but sometimes distracting and errorneous \endash  informal notions of proof. An example\~
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_baats1 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{14}{1988}{{Baaz}}{{}}}}}
] is the Babylonian notion to \ldblquote prove\rdblquote  arithmetical statements {\xe{\v Babylonian \ldblquote proof\rdblquote }} by considering \ldblquote large number\rdblquote  cases of algebraic formulae such as (Chapter V of Ref. 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_neugeb \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{96}{1934}{{Neugebauer}}{{}}}}}
]), \par
\pard\plain\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\tqc\tx3450\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \tab
\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 As naive and silly this Babylonian \ldblquote proof\rdblquote  method may appear at first glance \endash  for various subjective reasons (e.g. you may have some suspicions with regards to particular deductive proofs and their results; or you simply want to check the correctness of the deductive proof) it can be used to \ldblquote convince\rdblquote  students and ourselves that a result which has derived deductively is indeed applicable and viable. We shall make heavy use of these kind of intuitive examples. As long as one always keeps in mind that this inductive, merely anecdotal, method is necessary but not sufficient (sufficiency is, for instance, guaranteed by complete induction) it is quite all right to go ahead with it.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Another altogether different issue is knowledge acquired by revelation or by some authority. Oracles occur in modern computer science, but only as idealized concepts whose physical realization is highly questionable if not forbidden.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Let us} shortly enumerate some proof methods, among others: {\par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 1.\tab
(indirect) proof by contradiction; \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 2.\tab
proof by mathematical induction; \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 3.\tab
direct proof; \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 4.\tab
proof by construction; \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 5.\tab
nonconstructive proof. \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 {The contemporary} notion of proof is formalized and algorithmic. Around 1930 mathematicians could still hope for a \ldblquote mathematical theory of everything\rdblquote  which consists of a finite number of axioms and algorithmic derivation rules by which all true mathematical statements could formally be derived. In particular, as expressed in Hilbert\rquote s 2nd problem {hilbert-1900e}, it should be possible to prove the consistency of the axioms of arithmetic. Hence, Hilbert and other formalists dreamed, any such formal system (in German \ldblquote Kalk\'fcl\rdblquote ) consisting of axioms and derivation rules, might represent \ldblquote the essence of all mathematical truth.\rdblquote  This approach, as curageous as it appears, was doomed.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {G\'f6del}\~
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_godel1 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{54}{1931}{{G{\'f6}del}}{{}}}}}
], Tarski\~
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_tarski_32 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{128}{1932}{{Tarski}}{{}}}}}
], and Turing 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_turing_36 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{131}{1936-7 and 1937}{{{T}uring}}{{}}}}}
] put an end to the formalist program. They coded and formalized the concepts of proof and computation in general, equating them with algorithmic entities. Today, in times when universal computers are everywhere, this may seem no big deal; but in those days even coding was challenging \endash  in his proof of the undecidability of (Peano) arithmetic, G\'f6del used the uniqueness of prime decompositions to explicitly code mathematical formul\'e6! \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {For the sake} of exploring (algorithmically) these ideas let us consider the sketch of Turing\rquote s proof by contradiction of the unsolvability of the halting problem. The halting problem is about whether or not a computer will eventually halt on a given input, that is, will evolve into a state indicating the completion of a computation task or will stop altogether. Stated differently, a solution of the halting problem will be an algorithm that decides whether another arbitrary algorithm on arbitrary input will finish running or will run forever.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {\cf80 \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The scheme of the proof by contradiction is as follows: the existence of a hypothetical halting algorithm capable of solving the halting problem will be {\i assumed.} This could, for instance, be a subprogram of some suspicious supermacro library that takes the code of an arbitrary program as input and outputs 1 or 0, depending on whether or not the program halts. One may also think of it as a sort of oracle or black box analyzing an arbitrary program in terms of its symbolic code and outputting one of two symbolic states, say, 1 or 0, referring to termination or nontermination of the input program, respectively.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 On the basis of this {\i hypothetical halting algorithm} one constructs another {\i diagonalization program} as follows: on receiving some arbitrary {\i input program} code as input, the {diagonalization program} consults the {\i hypothetical halting algorithm} to find out whether or not this {input program} halts; on receiving the answer, it does the {\i opposite:} If the hypothetical halting algorithm decides that the input program {\i halts,} the diagonalization program does {\i not halt} (it may do so easily by entering an infinite loop). Alternatively, if the hypothetical halting algorithm decides that the input program does {\i not halt,} the {diagonalization program} will {\i halt} immediately.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The {diagonalization program} can be forced to execute a paradoxical task by receiving {\i its own program code} as input. This is so because, by considering the {diagonalization program,} the {hypothetical halting algorithm} steers the {diagonalization program} into {\i halting} if it discovers that it {\i does not halt;} conversely, the {hypothetical halting algorithm} steers the {diagonalization program} into {\i not halting} if it discovers that it {\i halts.}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 The complete contradiction obtained in applying the {\i diagonalization program} to its own code proves that this program and, in particular, the {hypothetical halting algorithm} cannot exist.\par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 A universal computer can in principle be embedded into, or realized by, certain physical systems designed to universally compute. Assuming unbounded space and time, it follows by reduction that there exist physical observables, in particular, forecasts about whether or not an embedded computer will ever halt in the sense sketched earlier, that are provably undecidable.\par
{\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 { \fs50 } \par
}\page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chapter {\*\bkmkstart BMch_n}3{\*\bkmkend BMch_n}\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Numbers and sets of numbers\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {The concept of numbering the universe} is far from trivial. In particular it is far from trivial which number schemes are appropriate. In the pythagorean tradition the natural numbers appear to be most natural. Actually Leibnitz (among others like Bacon before him) argues that just two number, say, \ldblquote {}\rdblquote  and \ldblquote {},\rdblquote  are enough to creat all of them.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {Every primary empirical evidence} seems to be based on some click in a detector: either there is some click or there is none. Thus every empirical physical evidence is composed from such elementary events.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Thus binary number codes are in good, albeit somewhat accidential, accord with the intuition of most experimentalists today. I call it \ldblquote accidential\rdblquote  because quantum mechanics does not favour any base; the only criterium is the number of mutually exclusive measurement outcomes which determines the dimension of the linear vector space used for the quantum description model \endash  two mutually exclusive outcomes would result in a Hilbert space of dimension two, three mutually exclusive outcomes would result in a Hilbert space of dimension three, and so on.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {There are,} of course, many other sets of numbers imagined so far; all of which can be considered to be encodable by binary digits. One of the most challenging number schemes is that to the real numbers 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_drobot \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{41}{1964}{{Drobot}}{{}}}}}
]. It is totally different from the natural numbers insofar as there are undenumerably many reals; that is, it is impossible to find a one-to-one function \endash  a sort of \ldblquote translation\rdblquote  \endash  from the natural numbers to the reals.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Cantor appears to be the first having realized this. In order to proof it, he invented what is today often called {\i Cantor\rquote s diagonalization technique,} or just diagonalization. It is a proof by contradiction; that is, what shall be disproved is assumed; and on the basis of this assumption a complete contradiction is derived.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {\cf80 \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 For the sake of contradiction, assume for the moment that the set of reals is denumerable. (This assumption will yield a contradiction.) That is, the enumeration is a one-to-one function {} (wrong), i.e., to any {} exists some {} and {\scaps0\b0\i vice versa}. No algorithmic restriction is imposed upon the enumeration, i.e., the enumeration may or may not be effectively computable. For instance, one may think of an enumeration obtained {\scaps0\b0\i via} the enumeration of computable algorithms and by assuming that {} is the output of the {}\rquote th algorithm. Let {} be the successive digits in the decimal expansion of {}. Consider now the {\i diagonal} of the array formed by successive enumeration of the reals, {\par
\pard\plain\s12\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\tqc\tx3450\tqr\tx6900\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \tab
\tab{\b0 (1)}\par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 yielding a new real number {}. Now, for the sake of contradiction, construct a new real {} by changing each one of these digits of {}, avoiding zero and nine in a decimal expansion. This is necessary because reals with different digit sequences are equal to each other if one of them ends with an infinite sequence of nines and the other with zeros, for example {}. The result is a real {} with {}, which differs from each one of the original numbers in at least one (i.e., in the \ldblquote diagonal\rdblquote ) position. Therefore, there exists at least one real which is not contained in the original enumeration, contradicting the assumption that {\i all} reals have been taken into account. Hence, {} is not denumerable.\par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Bridgman has argued 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_bridgman \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{29}{1934}{{Bridgman}}{{}}}}}
] that, from a physical point of view, such an argument is operationally unfeasible, because it is physically impossible to process an infinite enumeration; and subsequently, quasi on top of that, a digit switch. Alas, it is possible to recast the argument such that {} is finitely created up to arbitrary operational length, as the enumeration progresses.\par
{\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 { \fs50 } \par
}\page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chapter {\*\bkmkstart BMch_lvs}4{\*\bkmkend BMch_lvs}\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Finite-dimensional vector spaces\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {Vector Spaces} are prevalent in physics; they are essential for an understanding of mechanics, relativity theory, quantum mechanics, and statistical physics. In what follows excerps of Halmos\rquote  beautiful treatment \ldblquote Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces\rdblquote  will be reviewed 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_halmos_vs \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{60}{1974}{{Halmos}}{{}}}}}
]. Of course, there exist zillions of other very nice presentations, among them Greub\rquote s \ldblquote Linear algebra,\rdblquote  and Strang\rquote s \ldblquote Introduction to Linear Algebra,\rdblquote  among many others, even freely downloadable 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Greub75 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{58}{1975}{{Greub}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Strang_2009_ILA \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{125}{2009}{{Strang}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Homes_rorres \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{68}{2010}{{Homes and Rorres}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_lipschutz_schaul_la \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{86}{2009}{{Lipschutz and Lipson}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_Hefferon \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{63}{2011}{{Hefferon}}{{}}}}}
] competing for your attention.\par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 1  Basic definitions\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 In what follows the paragraph signs \ldblquote \'a7\rdblquote  refer to the paragraphs in Halmos\rquote  \ldblquote Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces.\rdblquote  The more physically oriented notation in Mermin\rquote s book on quantum information theory 
[{\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_mermin_04 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{90}{2002-2008}{{Mermin}}{{}}}}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BIB_mermin_07 \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{{91}{2007}{{Mermin}}{{}}}}}
] is adopted. Vectors are typed in bold face. The overline sign stands for complex conjugation; that is, if {